     Wyckoff 2.0: Structures,
Volume Profile and Order Flow

Combining the logic of the Wyckoff Methodology
   and the objectivity of the Volume Profile


            Rubén Villahermosa Chaves
Copyright © 2021 Rubén Villahermosa Chaves

All rights reserved



No part of this book may be reproduced or stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, without the express permission of the publisher.
                             CONTENT
PREFACE

PART 1. ADVANCED CONCEPTS OF THE WYCKOFF
METHODOLOGY

  1.1 The labels

  1.2 Price vs. Volume

  1.3 Types of advanced charts

     1.3.1 Ticks charts

     1.3.2 Volume charts

     1.3.3 Range charts

  1.4 Accumulation or failed Distribution

  1.5 Structural failure

     1.5.1 Weakness

     1.5.2 Strength

  1.6 Shortening of the Thrust (SOT)

  1.7 Other types of structures

     1.7.1 Sloping structures

     1.7.2 Unusual schemes

PART 2. RESOLVING FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
  2.1 Efficient use of lines

     2.1.1 The importance of the context

  2.2 Label changes and scenario building

  2.3 How to distinguish between accumulation and distribution?

  2.4 How to analyze a chart from 0?

     2.4.1 Structures

     2.4.2 Trading zones

     2.4.3 Lowering Temporality. Structures from highest to lowest.

     2.4.4 Rising Temporality. Structures from lowest to highest.

  2.5 What to do when the context is not clear?

     2.5.1 The controller

PART 3. TODAY’S TRADING ECOSYSTEM

  3.1 Types of financial market participants

  3.2 Electronic markets

     3.2.1 Algorithmic Trading

     3.2.2 High Frequency Trading

  3.3 Over The Counter (OTC) Markets

  3.4 Dark Pools

  3.5 Are markets random or deterministic?

     3.5.1 The adaptive markets hypothesis
     3.5.2 Where does the Wyckoff methodology fit in?

PART 4. THE IMPORTANCE OF VOLUME

  4.1 Auction Market Theory

     4.1.1 Variables

     4.1.2 Perception of value

     4.1.3 The four steps of market activity

  4.2 The Law of Supply and Demand

     4.2.1 Common errors of interpretation

     4.2.2 BID/ASK, Spread and Liquidity

     4.2.3 Types of participants based on their behavior

     4.2.4 How does Price movement occur?

     4.2.5 How do market turns occur?

  4.3 Order types

     4.3.1 Advanced features

  4.4 Tools for Volume Analysis

     4.4.1 Order book

     4.4.2 Tape

     4.4.3 Footprint

     4.4.2 Delta

  4.5 The Order Flow Problem
     4.5.1 Problem #1 Price Divergence

     4.5.2 Problem #2 Delta Divergence

     4.5.3 Price and volume trader

     4.5.4 Conclusion

PART 5. VOLUME PROFILE

  5.1 Auction Market Theory + Volume Profile

  5.2 Volume Profile Composition

  5.3 Types of profiles

  5.4 Difference between vertical and horizontal volume

  5.5 Difference between Volume Profile and Market Profile

  5.6 Profiles Shapes

     5.6.1 P-shape profile

     5.6.2 b-shape profile

  5.7 Uses of Volume Profile

     5.7.1 Identifying structures

     5.7.2 Determining market bias

     5.7.3 Analyzing trend health

     5.7.4 VPOC Migration

     5.7.5 Calibration of position management

  5.8 Trading principles with value areas
     5.8.1 Trading Range Principle

     5.8.2 Reversion principle

     5.8.3 Continuation Principle

     5.8.4 Failed reversion principle

     5.8.5 Summary table of the operating principle with value areas

PART 6. ORDER FLOW

  6.1 Footprint reading

  6.2 Imbalances

  6.3 Turning pattern

     6.3.1 Bearish turn patter: Buying Absorption and Initiative Selling

     6.3.2 Bullish turn pattern: Selling Absorption and Initiative Buying

  6.4 Continuation pattern

  6.5 Fractality

PART 7. WYCKOFF 2.0

  7.1 Context analysis

     7.1.1 Trading Range Context

     7.1.2 Trend Context

     7.1.3 Trading Range

     7.1.4 Trading in trend

  7.2 Identification of trading zones and levels
  7.3 Scenario Planning

  7.4 Trading management

     7.4.1 Entry

     7.4.2 Stop Loss

     7.4.3 Take Profit

     7.4.4 What to do when the Price goes without us?

PART 8. CASE STUDIES

  8.1 Euro/Dollar ($6E)currency cross

  8.2 Pound/Dollar ($6B) currency cross

  8.3 S&P500 ($ES) Index

  8.4 American Dollar/Canadian Dollar currency cross ($6C)

  8.5 Pound/Dollar ($6B) currency cross

  8.6 Euro/Dollar currency cross ($6E)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

BOOKS BY THIS AUTHOR
                           PREFACE




With the publication of this new content we give continuity to the first
book "The Wyckoff Methodology in Depth", where all the analytical tools
that this methodology addresses are presented in a clear way, as well as
the more theoretical aspect in the study of the behavior of financial
markets.

       In this book we will go a step further and address more complex
concepts; we will review the doubts most commonly raised by students of
the methodology and incorporate new tools based on the information
provided by the volume data that will be very useful, such as the Volume
Profile and Order Flow.

      I strongly recommend that before starting the study of this book
you have previously internalized all the concepts covered in the first one,
since everything seen is taken as understood and, if not, it could cause
some confusion or lack of understanding.
 PART 1. ADVANCED CONCEPTS
      OF THE WYCKOFF
       METHODOLOGY




As with the previous book, it is not intended at any point to divulge the
Wyckoff methodology approach from its purest point of view. There may
be Wyckoff traders who do but we understand that today's markets have
changed substantially from those studied by Richard Wyckoff and it is our
task to know how to adapt to these changes.

       But if there is one thing that is unchanging and where the advantage
of this approach over others really lies, it is the principles underlying its
teachings. Regardless of how markets and their traders have changed,
everything is still governed by the universal law of supply and demand;
and this is the cornerstone of the methodology.5

     This new way of analyzing the markets that I propose has caused
me some discussion with well-known (purist) disseminators of the
method. As I say, my objective is not to teach the most primitive form of
the methodology, but to take the principles that I consider valid and
enhance it together with the most modern tools of volume analysis.

       Actually, I believe that disseminating Richard Wyckoff's teachings
as he shared them is practically impossible. In the end, everyone teaches
their own view of the methodology along with the tools they trust the
most; and this is not to say that any one is above the rest. The important
thing is to obtain profitability from the market regardless of the approach
used.

      Having said this, I am sure that if Richard Wyckoff were alive
today, he himself would have taken care to evolve his own teachings to
adapt to new markets. As he was at the time, he would have remained a
student of volume and this would have led him to delve deeper into tools
such as the Volume Profile and Order Flow.

      And this is exactly what we have done and what I will introduce
you to throughout the book; bringing together the most solid principles of
market analysis with the most advanced tools of volume analysis.

      But before we get to that point we are going to add some advanced
concepts that you should know and clarify a number of frequently asked
questions.
                         1.1 THE LABELS



All the theoretical section seen in the first book is necessary and
indispensable content to master this approach and truly understand how
the market moves, but the Wyckoff methodology, or my way of
understanding it, goes much further.

       It is not simply a matter of labeling a chart almost robotically and
that's it. We have learned what underlies each event; how it is formed,
how it is represented on the chart, the psychology behind it and so on. But
as I say, the method is much richer.

       I say this because, by the very nature of the market, it is practically
impossible for any two structures to be completely the same. While it is
true that on a daily basis we see "textbook" schemes, which are very
genuinely adapted to classic examples, on most occasions the market will
develop less conventional structures, where the identification of such
events will be more complex.

       It is therefore essential not to focus on the exact search for events
(mainly the stop events that make up Phase A) and to keep in mind that
what is really important is the action as a whole. In other words, in many
charts we will see that a trend movement stops and starts a lateralization
process, but we are not able to correctly identify those first 4 stopping
events. In view of this, we may discard the asset and miss a future trading
opportunity. This is a mistake. As I say, the important thing is not that we
know how to identify those 4 stop events, but that the market has
objectively produced the stop of the trend movement. You may not
identify the Climax, the Reaction and the Test in a genuine way, but the
objective is that the market has stopped and has initiated a change of
character (migration from trend to sideways).




      As we can see in the examples, although these structures do not
look anything like the classic structures already studied, if we open the
graph and we find ourselves at the point marked with the arrow, it is not
unreasonable to think that possibly a process of accumulation has
developed below. It will be more or less difficult to identify the events of
the methodology, but what is objective is that we see a level where the
price is that we see a level where the price has rejected on several
occasions (Creek) and has finally managed to break it and position itself
above. This is the key.
       Surely if we force ourselves we can label each and every movement
but I repeat that this is not the important thing. The important thing about
the methodology is the logic behind it: that for the price to go up there
must first be an accumulation; and for it to go down there must be a
distribution. The form or manner in which they develop these processes
should not be the determining factor.

      The level of open-mindedness required is very great. Maybe even
some people's heads have exploded, but this is the reality. Fortunately, we
often see classic structures, but the continuous interplay between supply
and demand means that these processes can develop in infinite ways, and
we have to be prepared to see them all the same.
       Rather than thinking about labeling each and every price
movement, we are going to focus on trying to identify according to the
traces we observe who is probably gaining market control based on the
theory studied.
                  1.2 PRICE VS. VOLUME




In our way of conceiving market analysis, we initially do not value the
possibility of not taking into account either of these two data points, price
and volume. But as you delve deeper into the ecosystem that surrounds
the financial world, some obstacles start to arise.

      Without beating around the bush, I have to say that in my view
price data is certainly more relevant than volume data. And I will now
reason this assertion on the basis of two elements.

       On the one hand, the intraday volume that we can analyze in any
asset can be very misleading depending on the time of the session. For
example, at the opening of the American session of the S&P500 in its
local time (ETH), we will always see a large volume, much higher than
that seen prior to that opening during the regular time (RTH). And of
course, all the previous analysis will be biased in a certain way.
       As we can see in the chart of the ES (SP500 future), the highest
volatility and therefore price movement occurs during the American
session, with a very clear lack of participation during regular trading
hours. It would not make much sense to make analysis taking into account
globally all price action and volume as it could lead to confusion.

       It is not that during regular trading hours we have identified a
movement with a lack of interest (low volume); it is that this low volume
is due to an absence of traders at that time. The same would be true for
other times during the session, such as at the mid-day stop or just before
the start of the final stretch of the day, when there is also a significant
increase in volume.

      Once we know this, we have two ways to deal with this situation:

             ❖ If we want to continue trading on intraday time frames
        we must necessarily analyze the price and volume in comparative
        terms; on the one hand the one observed during local hours and
        on the other hand the one seen during regular hours.

            ❖ Furthermore, the best way to avoid confusion is to
        analyze the daily chart. As this temporality covers both sessions
        (ETH and RTH), there is no need to distinguish them for analysis.
        But of course, this would already require a total change of trading
        style.

      If there is one piece of data that already incorporates all the
information, it is the price. The price is the graphical representation of all
the orders already executed. We could be analyzing an asset at any time
and the price action would be faithfully reflected without having to be
aware of the time of the session and perform comparative analysis. This is
the advantage of price.

       Although without volume we lose a large part of the available
information, the continuous interaction between supply and demand
leaves its traces in the price and it develops some certainly repetitive
patterns (not in form but in substance).

      Obviously I am not recommending trading without analyzing
volume data, it is not necessary; I simply wanted to highlight the
prevalence of price over volume for our way of understanding and trading
the markets.

      Later on we will also see another drawback of volume data due to
the Over the Counter (OTC) and Dark Pools markets.
       1.3 TYPES OF ADVANCED CHARTS



In recent times, other forms of representing market activity have also
appeared. Among these types of charts are tick, volume and range charts.

      The main advantage of these charts is that they reduce the noise
present in time charts. These three types of charts have the common
peculiarity that they eliminate the time variable, which can be very useful
precisely for conditions such as those described above, where the market
spans different activity environments.




                  1.3.1 TICKS CHARTS
      A tick represents a transaction, a negotiation between two parties.
Therefore, the tick chart will be updated (the current candlestick will be
closed and a new one will be opened) when a certain number of
transactions (ticks) have taken place.

     The configuration of the chart (the number of ticks) will vary from
market to market as volatility differs from one market to another. This is
why you will have to make different tests until you find the most suitable
one.

       Generally the volume will be very similar in all the candlesticks
generated, but there will be subtle differences that can give us interesting
information since this type of chart measures the activity in terms of
transactions, but does not take into account the volume or amount traded
in those transactions.

       That is, a chart set at 1000 ticks will generate a new candlestick
when those 1000 ticks occur, but the amount traded in those 1000
transactions will differ. It is possible that 1 contract or several contracts
are traded in one transaction.
                1.3.2 VOLUME CHARTS




      The difference between tick and volume charts has to do with the
amount traded. While the tick chart measures the number of transactions
without taking into account how many contracts, shares or units have been
traded in each transaction, the volume charts measure the number of
contracts, shares or units traded before the generation of a new
candlestick.

      For example, a chart set to 1000 volume will generate a new
candlestick when that amount is traded, regardless of the number of trades
that were necessary for its completion.

      The main negative aspect of using this type of chart is that it
disables the use of volume analysis techniques.




                 1.3.3 RANGE CHARTS
      While the two types previously presented based their representation
on volume data, the range chart is based on price data.

      This type of chart represents market activity from the point of view
of price movement. All its bars will be displayed with the same size,
regardless of the time it took for their formation. In high volatility
environments more bars will appear and vice versa for low volatility
environments.

      In case the chart is set to range 15, new bars will appear when the
price moves 15 ticks in one direction or another
         1.4 ACCUMULATION OR FAILED
                 DISTRIBUTION



When the analysis of all the traces observed on the chart suggests that the
imbalance is occurring towards one side but at the moment of truth the
opposite side presses more aggressively, we will be talking about
continuity failure or failed structure.

       During the development of the structures, the control of the market
is at stake and the market may be changing sides (in favor of buyers or
sellers) continuously, depending on the types of traders and the valuations
they make of the asset.

      As we know that until we visualize the effect of a cause we cannot
determine what it is (accumulation or distribution), it would almost be
more logical to avoid using the term failed structure, since a failed
accumulation will always be a distribution structure and vice versa. But it
is a very interesting concept that helps us to understand an important
market dynamic, which is none other than the knowledge of the different
types of traders and how they intervene based on temporality
        When the price makes a potential Spring at the lows of the structure
and from there manages to reach the top of the structure again, it is
obvious that buyers have entered with some aggressiveness down there;
but we do not know when they will decide to close their positions. It may
simply be that they are very short-term traders who take advantage of the
visit to some liquidity zone (either at the highs of the structure or at some
intermediate zone) to find the counterpart with which to match their
orders and to close their positions there obtaining profit. This closing of
buying positions would cause a loss of bullish momentum and possibly a
new downward turn.

      Or it may be that traders who have bought at the Spring have a
longer-term perspective and will do everything possible to stay in the
market and defend their position if necessary, producing the full
development of the accumulation.

      In addition, we also do not know if there may be longer-term
traders, with a greater ability to move the markets pending this upward
movement to take advantage of it and enter aggressively short.

       On the other hand, it should also be remembered that not all large
traders win systematically and recurrently over time. Sometimes many of
them are forced to take losses and this failed structure context could be a
perfect example. As Al Brooks rightly says in his books on Price Action,
in liquid markets every slightest price movement is generated because one
big trader is buying and another is selling. It is a battle between these
large capitals and therefore there will be part of them that will generate a
loss in some of their trading.

       The key to determine that we are in front of a failed structure is that
it has absolutely all the traces in favor of one direction but at the decisive
moment (in the test after the break); it fails and generates an imbalance in
favor of the opposite side.

       As for the example of failed accumulation, we would have to see
that all the traces suggest that the market is controlled by the buyers, that
the price has to develop a Spring potential, that the bullish breakout is
genuine from the point of view of price action and volume; but that finally
in the BUEC potential position the price fails to continue rising, and an
imbalance in favor of the sellers is provoked, leaving the structure as
distributive.
       Exactly the same but in reverse we would need to see to determine
a failed distribution: traces in favor of sellers, development of potential
Upthrust, genuine bearish breakout and that in test position after breakout
aggressive buying enters and rotates the structure as accumulation.

       It is important to be aware that we do not know the ability of
traders to continue to control the market because at any time a trader with
a greater capacity can appear and cause the rotation. What at the
beginning seemed to be unbalanced to one side, finally with this new
appearance, the imbalance is confirmed to the opposite side.

      So we have these two very important casuistries to evaluate:

      ❖ We do not know the intention of the traders who are
       supporting the current movement. If they are short term traders
       who will close positions in the next liquidity zone or if on the
       contrary they have a longer term perspective and will continue
       until the complete development of the structure.

      ❖ We do not know if traders with a higher capacity can step
       in. At the moment of truth, in the test after the breakout that
       would confirm the directionality of the structure, aggressive
       traders with a greater ability to move the market by pushing in the
       opposite direction may appear, since in the longer term they may
       have a different vision.

        Obviously we encounter this difficulty continuously, that is why
our advantage is to operate in favor of the last imbalance and for this it is
vital to identify the dominant event: the shock.

      The shakeout, as already discussed, is the most determining action
in market functioning. Its underlying logic is so powerful that it leads us
to always bias in favor of it. Then, if the rest of the traces go along with it,
we will always favor trading in the direction of the last shock, i.e. long
after seeing a potential Spring; and short after seeing an Upthrust.




       Some may conclude that waiting for price at extremes and trading
only potential Upthrust/Spring situations is the most convenient way to
simplify the whole analysis; and it's not entirely out of line. That's the
beauty of the Wyckoff methodology, that by offering a way to understand
as objectively as possible how the market moves, each trader can use its
principles to develop their own strategies.

       From my point of view, the traces offered by the development of
the structures from their inception are significant and help us to establish
scenarios with a higher probability. For example, if I observe certain
distributional characteristics in a structure and it is subsequently in a
position of potential bearish breakout and potential Spring, the analysis of
the context will lead me to favor the bearish breakout; while the trader
who only trades the shocks at the extremes without evaluating anything
else will do the opposite. And generally the market will develop (in this
example) in favor of the distributive continuation since the imbalance is
latent and has been evident during the development of the range.
               1.5 STRUCTURAL FAILURE



It is a very simple concept that can help us to evaluate the dynamics of the
movements.

      This failure can be found in all types of structures; in structures
with bullish or bearish slopes as well as in horizontal, convergent or
divergent structures.

        The first thing to do is to identify the structural logic that the price
decides to follow. This will be determined by the successful touches that
respect a structure formed by two zones of supply and demand. This is the
initial key: identify the structure that the price has validated. The more
touches it has, the more confidence that structure will give us.

      At that point, and under the principle of favoring the continuity of
what the price has been doing, it would be logical to think that the market
will continue to move respecting that structural logic, moving from
extreme to extreme.

        In the event that the price fails to develop a new test on the opposite
side and instead generates a turn before reaching that zone, we will say
that it has developed a structural failure since it has not continued with the
dynamics that it was bringing and this signal adds strength to the scenario
in favor of that last turn.




       From this concept, it is understood that the event of the last support
of supply or demand (Last Point of Support and Last Point of Supply) are
structural failures in which the price is blocked in its attempt to go after
the shakeout event to start from that point the subsequent movement to
break the structure.




                        1.5.1 WEAKNESS

       The example of structural failure that denotes weakness is found
when the price, after validating a structure on several occasions, is unable
to continue moving under that logic of movements and cannot reach the
top of the structure.

       This inability to continue moving as it had been doing up to that
point denotes underlying weakness. Buyers are no longer in control of the
market and it is the sellers who have begun to appear more significantly.
      This indication does not suggest an immediate reversal to the
downside; rather, it is one more element to take into account when
correctly reading the market context.

      It could simply be a temporary halt of the previous trend to develop
from there a period of consolidation during which to reaccumulate stock
and continue rising.




                       1.5.2 STRENGTH

      The action that would denote bottom strength would be obtained
when we see that the price cannot reach the bottom of the structure it has
been working on.

        That is, if the price has been developing a series of lower highs and
lower lows whose action fits perfectly within the upper and lower limits,
we will favor that the market continues to behave in the same way and
therefore we will look for a new test on the opposite side of the structure.
If, for example, it comes from a test on the high side of the structure, the
dynamics suggest that it should now test again on the low side. If during
the development of such a move the price turns around without reaching
the bottom, we will say that the market has generated a structural failure
and it is a sign of market strength as buyers have not allowed the price to
fall further down.




       If in addition to this footprint such a move manages to shake out
some relevant previous low we would be in a potential Spring situation
with greater underlying strength because it conflates with that structural
failure.

      The reasoning behind such action is that buyers have entered
aggressively unbalancing control in their favor. These buyers have a
higher interest rate and are blocking the price from falling. They don't
want the price to go down. They don't want anyone else to be able to ride
the upward move.

      This indication does not suggest an immediate reversal to the
upside; rather it is one more element to take into account when reading
the market context correctly.
  1.6 SHORTENING OF THE THRUST (SOT)



It could be translated into English as "Shortening of the Thrust". It is a
pattern of change of direction. It is an analytical tool originally used by
Wyckoff to measure the loss of momentum or exhaustion of an impulsive
motion or thrust.

      Visually it is observed how each new extreme travels a shorter
distance than the previous extreme and therefore it is said that the thrust is
shortening.

      ❖ For the uptrend example, we would observe how each new high
       travels a shorter distance than the previous high; suggesting some
       deterioration in demand and signaling a possible bearish turn.

      ❖ For the downtrend example, we would observe a decrease in the
       distance the new low travels relative to the distance the previous
       low traveled, suggesting some deterioration in supply and
       signaling a possible upward turn.

      The main idea is a lack of continuity in that direction; an
exhaustion of the forces that so far seemed to be in control of the market.
The loss of momentum anticipates a major pullback and sometimes even a
reversal of the trend.
       For this behavior to be valid, a minimum of three thrusts in the
direction of the trend is required. From three or four momentum moves, it
is useful to start looking for this shortening pattern in the final push.

      ❖ When the price advance shortens but there is strong volume, it
       means that the big effort got little reward: Effort/Result
       Divergence. In the case of a bearish example, demand would be
       appearing; and in a bullish example, supply would be appearing.

      ❖ When the price advance shortens and there is also weak volume,
       it means exhaustion. In the case of a bearish example, supply
       would be withdrawing; and in a bullish example, it would be
       buyers withdrawing from the market.

      When there are more than four pushes and shorting persists, the
trend may be too strong to trade against.

       What would confirm the change in direction would be a strong
impulsive move in the opposite direction. After the shortening of the
thrust, we want to see the new impulse in the opposite direction have high
volume, denoting intentionality. After this impulse that changes direction
direction we could wait for a pullback to seek to join in the direction of
the new impulsive movement.

      Always keep in mind the context in which the shortening of the
thrust takes place:




       If the price breaks the top of a range and reverses, this action is a
potential Upthrust. If after a few bearish waves a shortening of the thrust
occurs and suggests a buy trade; you should keep in mind that the price
has just developed an Upthrust and will most likely continue to fall. Any
buy trade should be avoided, and if taken, closed quickly after a weak
response. The same thing would happen in case of observing the bearish
pattern after a potential Spring, the directional bias would be marked by
the shakeout so the SOT short trade idea would have to be questioned.

       The Shortening of the Thrust pattern can also be seen in individual
bars as well as in moves. In this case, one would observe how successive
bars make less and less progress. If it also coincides in an operating zone
where we would be in a position to look for a counter trade for context,
the situation would be ideal.
      1.7 OTHER TYPES OF STRUCTURES



Initially, structures with horizontal development have been presented as a
basic schematic. They are the easiest to identify and for the operator who
begins to deepen for the first time in the Wyckoff methodology I would
recommend to work this type of schemes almost exclusively.

       As we have already mentioned on several occasions, the market is a
living entity that is constantly changing due to the continuous interaction
between supply and demand. This interaction is what causes the
generation of structures, which can be developed in different ways.

       It would make no sense to approach the market thinking that it must
behave as established by the basic schemes initially studied. The reality is
that every moment is unique and will be different from any future one,
since it is practically impossible for the same circumstances to occur at
two different moments.

       For two structures to develop in the same way, the same
participants should be present at both moments and behave in exactly the
same way, which is impossible.

       This is why it is important to be open-minded and try to go a step
further in understanding the methodology. Wyckoff gave us some
guidelines to follow highlighting above all: how markets move; the
processes of accumulation and distribution; and the three fundamental
laws.

       This is the theoretical framework that underpins the methodology.
The Wyckoff trader relies on these tools to analyze the chart in order to
try to elucidate who is in control of the market and thus be able to come
up with judicious scenarios.

       The next step is to be able to identify the development of a structure
even if it does not look ideal. On many occasions we will be able to work
in real time with structures that are very genuinely adapted to the classic
structures studied, but there will be other occasions when this will not be
the case.

      And this should not be a cause for disappointment. Advanced
Wyckoff traders understand that these accumulation and distribution
processes can play out differently depending on how balanced or
unbalanced the market is in favor of buyers and sellers.

        This is the key to everything. Based on the condition of the market
at that moment (who has the most control), the price will develop one type
of structure or another.

      We will now look at some types of unconventional structures.




           1.7.1 SLOPING STRUCTURES

      Although they are certainly more difficult to see, they actually
develop in exactly the same way as horizontal structures. Do a test; take
one of the examples and mentally try to rotate the image to fit the
structure as if it were horizontal. You will see that the general behavior,
events and phases have an identical development to the horizontal ranges.
The only element that varies is the market condition, and that is that there
will be situations where either buyers or sellers will initially have more
control.

      Generally speaking, we are going to take the view that a structure
with an upward slope suggests some underlying strength, i.e. greater
buyer control; and that structures with a downward slope suggest some
weakness, i.e. greater seller control.




       Initially, when identifying the stop Phase A we will establish the
limits of the range horizontally. If we observe that in Phase B the price
does not respect these extremes and begins to move out of the structure, it
will be time to start thinking about a possible sloping structure. We will
connect these extremes and observe if the price really respects the limits
of the structure.
      At other times we will simply open a chart and it will be very visual
how the price has respected the extremes of a sloping structure. Connect
the lows and highs of Phases A, B and C. You can draw one end first and
clone the line at the opposite end. The important thing is that the channel
contains virtually all of the price action within it. The more touches these
extremes have, the more strength that the structure is being worked
(respected).




       It is important to note that we do not need to see perfect price
touches at these extremes to determine that the price is working that
structure. It does not need to be something totally precise, the key is that it
should be something that jumps out and allows us to connect all the
extremes even if it is necessary to draw a zone of a certain width, rather
than a line.

       Similarly, I would always recommend not to discard horizontal
levels altogether. In particular, they offer me greater confidence and there
is a chance that the price will re-enter the original structure and we can
continue to work it.

      There are four possible sloping structures that we can find:
            ❖ Accumulation structure with an upward slope.

            ❖ Accumulation structure with bearish slope.

            ❖ Bearish sloping distribution structure.

            ❖ Distribution structure with upward slope.




ACCUMULATION STRUCTURE WITH UPWARD SLOPE




       This is the variant that denotes the greatest underlying strength.
After the stop Phase A, the price begins to fluctuate up and down during
the development of the structure, clearly showing a series of rising highs
and rising lows.

      Buyers have certain aggressiveness; they value the asset price at
higher levels and do not allow it to fall into oversold areas in order to
protect their position.

      These structures are not easy to operate mainly because the
overcoming of any previous high will seem to us that we are facing a
potential shock that will turn the market down. But in reality it is the very
nature of the movement: impulses and reversals.

      And this impression will be even more present in the BUEC
potential zone. Although this is the most conservative entry and gives us
greater security, visually we see the price trading at very high levels and it
does not seem to us (subjectively) an optimal entry point.

      The market, oblivious to all this, will continue its course and if it is
really an accumulation process, it will start from there the trend
movement out of the range in search of higher levels of liquidity.

       This example of the BTC is very instructive as we can identify one
of the concepts presented, the structural failure of strength.




      We see how after the abrupt fall the price accumulates quickly
(green box) to start a new structure a few levels higher. This in itself is a
sign of underlying strength. We see that there is a very high volume
traded in that fall and the fact of seeing a subsequent reaction to the rise
already suggests that at least in principle the sentiment is bullish. If
analyzing the context we see that below the current price there are high
volumes we could make a simple interpretation as in such volume have
entered aggressively buyers as otherwise the price could not have moved
upwards.

      Other interesting footprints that suggested accumulation to us is the
decrease in volume during the development of the structure and the
predominance of the bullish waves of the Weis indicator.

       In addition to this, the key element that marks a before and after in
the reading of the control in this structure is the Upthrust action. At the
top of the structure it develops a minor distribution scheme. This pattern
could very well have acted as a function of UTAD and triggered the
bearish breakout. This is the behavior we expect to happen after a
shakeout, but what we see is a total inability to fall. After this minor
distributive scheme the price fails to even reach the bottom of that upward
sloping structure it has been working on, and this is nothing more or less
than a structural failure of strength.

      Then it develops an internal shakeout that acts as a test event in
Phase C causing the final imbalance and continuation to the upside.

       Also noteworthy is the location of the High Volume Node and the
VPOC of the structure. How the price is unable to cross this high trading
zone, suggesting the control of the bulls. We will talk about these Volume
Profile zones later.
       Here we see another example of a bullish sloping cumulative
pattern. In this case the slope is quite steep suggesting that the current
market condition is quite strong.

       We see the final stop without climatic volume (Selling Exhaustion)
and how from then on the price starts a clear succession of rising highs
and rising lows. Decreasing volume during the development of Phases A
and B suggesting absorption. It finds it difficult to position above the
High Volume Node but once it gets it after the shakeout continues to
show strength and manages to break to the upside with good bullish
candlesticks (SOSbar).

       Very interesting as the Back Up develops over the top of the
structure (Creek) in confluence with an operating level of volume (weekly
VWAP).




ACCUMULATION STRUCTURE WITH BEARISH SLOPE
       This is the cumulative variant with the greatest weakness. The
bearish slope, that dynamic of declining highs and lows, already denotes a
total control of bearish traders. Weakness is latent, but even so, buyers
finally appear and provoke the cumulative denouement.

      After observing the appearance of the first trend stop events, the
weakness will be so high that the market will not be able to withstand the
development of a horizontal structure and instead signs of weakness will
begin to appear, generating lower and lower lows.

       Structurally, the price will respect the bearish dynamics, fluctuating
between the upper and lower extremes of the channel. The new lows will
travel a decreasing distance, visually observing a very common pattern of
trend exhaustion (Shortening of the Thrust).

       In addition, quite possibly the market will develop some kind of
structural failure where at a certain point in time the price abandons the
dynamics that would lead it to visit the bottom of the structure and instead
finds support somewhere in between. Possibly it has made a floor and is
ready to start the uptrend movement.
      What would confirm the SOT pattern and structural failure would
be for price to now develop strong upside momentum. Preferably we
would want to see this momentum effectively break the bearish structure
changing the market dynamics. Now it would be the time to wait for a
bearish pullback to look to join in favor of the imbalance caused by the
buyers.

      In this example we see how the price is respecting the extremes by
turning up and down. As we have already said, the identification of this
type of structures is subjective so they should be very visual and not
forced. The idea is that they contain most of the price action.




       A detail to highlight in this chart is how the monthly VWAP acts.
This is the darkest dynamic level and as can be seen the price reacts on it
every time it interacts. From the first touch on the Secondary Test, the
price stays consistently above it, a trace that would suggest some control
on the part of the buyers.

       As always, the key event is the total Shakeout that causes the
development of the effect built on that cause. After said Shakeout the
price develops a LPS above the VPOC of the structure, which is followed
by the JAC and the Back Up that again is going to look for a confluence
zone (weekly VWAP and Value Area High) to from there continue the
development in Phase E out of the range.

      These zones and volume operating levels will be discussed in detail
below.

       Here we observe another clear cumulative structure with a bearish
slope full of details.




      After the Phase A stop we see how the price mainly trades at the
bottom of the range being unable to make any kind of test to the top,
which suggests some underlying weakness. Gradually the volume
decreases with respect to that seen in the SC and after the appearance of
the Shakeout a sign of strength is now able to send the price to the top
(minor Sign of Strength).

       At that point we can already see how the lows of Phases A, B and C
travel a ridiculous distance to the downside, suggesting the appearance of
the Shortening Of the Thrust (SOT) pattern and its bullish implication in
this case.
       Although the first upward move is not strong enough to break the
structure, it is already a certain change of character to have succeeded in
making such a test. At that point the price develops an internal shock to a
previous high in confluence with the weekly VWAP but this time the
market is unable to test the bottom of the structure, developing a structural
failure of strength evidenced in that LPS. Objectively we already have the
Shakeout, the strength sample and the structural failure = potential
imbalance in favor of buyers.

       From then on and through two shows of strength the price manages
to break the range and we see how it will look for a confluence zone to
develop the test after the breakout (Back Up). This zone is composed of
the Creek of the broken structure, the weekly VWAP (green dynamic line)
and the Value Area High of the profile. Another example of the
functionality of this type of operating levels supported by the context.




DOWNWARD SLOPING DISTRIBUTION STRUCTURE
       This is the distributive structure with the greatest weakness. After
the identification of the first events that suggest the stop of the previous
trend movement, the strong condition of weakness that floods the market
will cause the development of the subsequent movements in the form of
declining highs and lows.

     Visually, a bearish channel will be observed where the price
bounces at its extremes respecting the dynamics.

      The key, as always, will be in the correct identification of the Test
event in Phase C that gives rise to the bearish breakout movement. We
will constantly be looking for this test event to do so in the form of a
shakeout (in this case, Upthrust After Distribution -UTAD-). It has
already been mentioned countless times that it is the event that can give
greater confidence to a trader when proposing scenarios and therefore in
most cases we should wait for its appearance.

      This final shakeout can be expected either in the form of an
overshoot at the top of the structure suggesting an overbought condition;
or as a local shakeout to some relevant previous high. The more showy
and exaggerated the shakeout, the more confidence it will give us as it
will suggest that it has captured greater liquidity and therefore the
subsequent move will have greater momentum.

      The main difference with respect to the cumulative structures that
also have a bearish slope is that in this case we will not observe that loss
of momentum characteristic of the Shortening Of the Thrust pattern, nor
will we see any kind of structural failure.

       It is certainly a difficult type of scenario to trade as subjectively the
trader observes how the price is relatively low and may determine that it
is not the place to go short. But we must work to eliminate subjectivities
and remain with the certain objectivity that this type of reading provides.

       Due to the almost total control that sellers have, the price will move
with great speed. We must be fully focused otherwise we will most likely
miss the move. And this is not bad news because if you have been able to
make a correct reading and see that the imbalance is in favor of the
bearish, you may lose the trading opportunity for not being quick in your
decisions, but at least you will not be in a position to enter on the wrong
side of the market (buying) thus avoiding a loss.




      In this example of redistribution with bearish slope we see that the
stop occurs with a large volume during the entire development of Phase A
and that during Phase B we also observe unusual volume peaks,
characteristic footprint of distributive schemes. In addition to that the
bearish waves Weis predominating at all times.

       The price manages to position itself below the high volume node
and a subsequent upward retracement movement will test this area leaving
the Last Point of Supply event to generate the effective bearish breakout
(SOW) from there. Once below the structure, a new test to the lower part
of the structure and continuation of the fall.
       A trader who does not take into account this dynamic of structures
and who does not know how to analyze judiciously all the traces within
himself would most likely see the price fall, away from the VWAP, in a
possible oversold condition and perhaps have a bullish bias. But the truth
is that the market at all times was flooded with weakness and this was
reflected in the price action and volume.




       New example of distributive scheme with very characteristic
footprints. Volume spikes, predominant Weis and a Phase C jerk that
originates the bearish breakout movement.

       The UTAD test happens at a very important location, at the VPOC
of the range. It is the most traded price level. Moreover, it converges with
the top of the structure. It is the ideal location to look for a short trigger.
Another example of how the Volume Profile can help us to better analyze
the market context.

        Such was the underlying weakness that there was no possibility of a
test after a breakout (LPSY) on the lower part of the structure.
UPWARD SLOPING DISTRIBUTION STRUCTURE




        This type of dynamics initially presents certain background
strength, evidenced by that succession of rising highs and rising lows until
in its final development the aggressiveness of the sellers becomes evident
rotating the structure as distributive.

       As discussed in the previous structures, a useful tool for its
evaluation can be the identification of the Shortening of the Thrust
pattern. In this case, the price may make new highs but travel little
distance from the previous highs, denoting that lack of momentum.

       If it also leaves some kind of structural failure that denotes
weakness (does not reach the top of the structure), it is a further indication
that suggests that control may be rotating to the bearish.

      As always, the reading will be enhanced by observing a shakeout
(UTAD) either to the upper end of the structure in the form of an
overshoot reaching an overbought condition; or to some relevant prior
high.
       Let's not forget the analysis of complementary tools that analyze
volume data, such as Volume Profile and Weis wave analysis either. The
location of the operating zones of the Volume Profile will always help us
in making decisions, while the wave analysis will allow us to put the
magnifying glass on the interest traded in the movements and will
sometimes be key to a correct analysis.




       Example of distributive structure with upward slope and without
extreme shakeout. As more important details we see that climatic volume
in the middle of the range. It is a warning sign as they should not appear
as a general rule in cumulative schemes and therefore could be a footprint
to add in favor of bearish control.

       Very visual also the Shortening of the Thrust pattern between the
highs set by the AR in Phase A, the UT in Phase B and the UTAD in
Phase C. New highs but with little movement between them suggesting
that loss of momentum.

       On the Phase C UTAD we see how the price tries to leave the value
area of the Composite profile and is rejected. The market is not interested
in trading at higher prices and a new signal is added in favor of sellers.
This action could also be seen as the test event in Phase C where it shakes
out highs from within the structure. No doubt this is a difficult scheme to
trade in real time.

        After a first movement of weakness the price manages to position
itself below the VPOC of the profile and this action is accompanied with a
large bearish Weis wave. At that point the directional bias should be clear
and we are already in a position to propose a short trade idea.

      Again we see the great importance of taking into account the
volume levels. The test after breakout (LPSY) is going to look for the
confluence zone of the broken structure and the VPOC to start from there
the bearish continuation in Phase E.




       This time the test event in Phase C if it manages to reach the top of
the structure shaking all the highs of the same. As we know, this action
adds further strength to the bearish scenario.

       It is very striking the degree of bullish slope, suggesting at the
beginning of the same a great strength in the background. Strength that is
dissipated and blocked with the appearance of the volume peaks during
the development of Phase C.
       Unquestionable sign of weakness that sends the price to the origin
of the movement in the AR and also manages to develop a new bearish
leg. Not before going to visit twice the most traded volume level (VPOC)
of the structure to continue trading down from there. Once again, this is
an impressive demonstration of the effectiveness of these volume levels.

      All the concepts related to the Volume Profile and its trading
implications will be explained in depth in the last part of the book.




              1.7.2 UNUSUAL SCHEMES

      Within this category we will include all other structures that do not
follow a horizontal or sloping formation.

      If we wanted to get exquisite we could frame as Wyckoff
methodology structures practically all accumulation or distribution ranges
regardless of their shape, including the classic charting patterns that we all
know such as head and shoulders, wedges, triangles and so on.

       From my point of view trying to justify every single move and
structure development under the Wyckoff methodology approach does
him no favors. Wyckoff has little to do with those robotic patterns, His
study is much deeper so the smartest thing to do would be to distance
oneself from that possible link that may associate the classic chartist
patterns with the Wyckoff method.

      With the benefit of hindsight, as they say, any range can be labeled
with some success. But this is operationally invalid. Labeling past charts
is a very interesting exercise for initiated traders in order to put their
knowledge into practice and to feed their subconscious to prepare it for
real time trading. But once you have a certain level of study of the
methodology, continuing to label past charts becomes meaningless

       The key is that any structure, if we force ourselves a little, can be
turned into a nice structure that would fit perfectly into the events and
phases of the Wyckoff methodology. But our focus should not be here,
what good is it for me to know the location of the labels in a hypodermic
(V-shaped) turn of the market if in real time I am not going to be able to
trade it?

       As I say, it is a waste of time and energy to try to study unusual
structures, mainly because, as the name suggests, they do not appear with
any regularity. Our advantage is to wait for classical structures to appear.

       Classic structures, with a strict development of their events and
phases, but at the same time allowing certain fluidity based on the
particular conditions of the market. The perfect example of this statement
would be the structures with slope: classic formations where all events
and phases are perfectly observed, and at the same time the background
condition slightly modifies the final development (some bullish or bearish
dynamics)
       This chart of the FDAX is a very good example of what I am
talking about. Once its development is complete I can go back and label
every single move if I want, but in real time it is virtually impossible
behavior to trade. A structure locked at lows but developing rising highs
in turn. It makes no sense to put the focus there.

      Besides this type of inoperable structures, it is a good time to
remember that theory and practice in real time often do not go hand in
hand and that it is necessary to have a sufficiently open mind.
       In this chart of the SP500, while it is true that a very genuine
structure is observed in its final part, many in real time may have
encountered difficulties when trying to identify Phase A.

      Price comes up, develops a broad bearish move, and from there
another further upward move that surpasses the previous high. Could that
succession be the BC, AR, ST? It could, but that is not what is relevant.
What is relevant is that a change in character has occurred; that the price
has moved from a trending to a sideways state and that a cause is going to
be built back up which will have an effect. This is all that matters, the
context behind the price action.

     Many may still only look for "textbook" structures and, although
we see them appearing all the time, the reading offered by the
methodology is much more interesting than just staying there




       Here is another example of exactly the same. If we observe the
market from a strict point of view seeking to identify the perfect
movements framed within the proportionality that in theory there should
be between phases, we may have problems in identifying them when we
see this type of development.
        If we treat these three movements that I mark as the SC, AR and
ST, Phase B would have very little duration since the only objective event
that is observed on the graph is the s shakeout of Phase C. What do we do
then if the theory tells us that Phase B should be longer than Phases A and
C? Well then nothing, theory is all very well for generalizing events, but
real time trading and analysis will require a much more open mind.

     Once the trader reaches a certain degree of understanding of the
methodology he should focus on seeing the market in terms of price
dynamics and not in terms of labels.
              PART 2. RESOLVING
             FREQUENTLY ASKED
                 QUESTIONS




In this section I will delve into some of the most frequent doubts raised by
students of the Wyckoff methodology.

     It is a source of pride to expose some complex doubt as this is a
symptom that the study has been sufficiently deepened. The operator
bombards his brain with all the concepts over and over again; and the
moment he gets in front of a graph, confusion starts to appear.

      This is normal and even more so in a discretionary approach where
there are so many elements to take into account. In this part we will
address important questions that will help us to further consolidate our
knowledge.
             2.1 EFFICIENT USE OF LINES



When the retail trader first approaches the markets, he likes to draw lines
to identify support and resistance levels in the hope that the market will
respect them. But we must know one thing, the market does not care how
many lines you have drawn on the chart, nor if they are of greater or lesser
thickness or color.

       In no case, unless you have a statistical study that verifies it, should
the use of lines in isolation be taken into account in trading terms. That is
to say, it is not recommended to buy or sell simply because the price has
touched a certain line.

       The movie that the lines tell us has to do with who is mainly in
control of the market. If we observe a bull market in which a clear bullish
line or channel can be drawn, the objective reasoning is that the buyers are
in control. If what we can visualize is a clear bearish movement channeled
between two extremes what we will have is a control by sellers. And
finally, a horizontal lateralization with repeated turns on two extremes
will evidence a balance between both participants.

      Therefore, the idea behind drawing lines, whether to build
horizontal ranges, all kinds of channels or simple trend lines should aim
to:

      ❖ Obtain a further footprint of market sentiment

      ❖ Give us an interesting location to bias directionality

      Let's continue to work with logic. If we have just reasoned that an
uptrend line or channel gives us evidence of a buyer-controlled market,
with this baseline information it seems that the most sensible thing to do
would be to:

      ❖ Favor purchases.

      ❖ Only operate in sale after seeing the rupture of such lines (of
       such bullish dynamics).

       Here it should be clarified that the fact that the market is rising does
not mean that a trend-following strategy (in this case a buying strategy)
will necessarily have better results than a counter-trend strategy (in this
case a selling strategy). It is simply a matter of identifying where the path
of least resistance is (through the upward or downward dynamics) since
looking for additions in its favor would offer us a priori trading with a
greater chance of success (since we are operating in favor of who has
control).

      Whether you want to buy or sell when identifying a bullish channel,
which locations would be the most appropriate to look for trades? There is
no doubt that the most optimal would be to wait for the price at the
extremes.

      If what you are looking for is to anticipate a market turn (which is
not recommended), at least wait for the break of the trend line that
determines the latest dynamics that the price is following. It could be a
footprint of momentum loss although without taking into account
anything else any trade to try to turn the price would seem too risky.

       Now, and continuing with the example of the uptrend, if the price is
approaching the bottom of its channel or trend line, is the fact of being in
this location reason enough to buy? Absolutely not, except for the
exception mentioned above.

      In this example what we observe is that the price is following a
dynamic that goes through visiting both extremes; and under the principle
of favoring that the market continues doing what it has been doing
previously, it would be interesting to look for the incorporation in
purchase looking for a new impulse to the rise. But that's it, at this point
the power of the lines ends. It gives us a fingerprint on market sentiment
and can help determine market bias. Based on the price dynamics we
would find ourselves in an interesting area to look for buying, which does
not mean that we should necessarily buy.

       It is best used in conjunction with other analytical tools, such as the
Wyckoff methodology approach. If we identify the price in a location
where it is interesting to look for buying, instead of buying directly, how
would we look at the possibility of waiting for the price to develop some
cumulative pattern in that area? This would seem to be a useful use of the
lines.

      1. Identify price dynamics

      2. Wait for it to reach some extreme to bias directionality

      3. Look for the development of some accumulation/distribution
  structure
        2.1.1 THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
                   CONTEXT

       If through the analysis with the lines, whether trend lines or some
type of channel, we determine that we are in an interesting operating zone
(in extremes), it could be the moment to, if the trader so decides, go down
in timeframe to look for a lower accumulation/distribution scheme on that
location.




       Analyzing a high seasonality chart, we would be located in an
interesting area for that turn to occur, looking for a movement to the
opposite extreme, so an efficient use of the context would be to go down
in seasonality to try to operate that minor accumulation structure that will
generate the turn.

      As we can see, the predictive power of the lines by itself is not very
convincing; but used together with other tools they can offer us an
operationally interesting use.
     2.2 LABEL CHANGES AND SCENARIO
                 BUILDING



As market control may change during the development of a structure, we
need to make a continuous assessment of price action and volume as new
information is coming into the market and being displayed on the chart.
Based on this, we will always give greater relevance to the latest
information available to us.

       When we propose a scenario, we always do so taking into account
all the information available so far, that is to say, based on the market
conditions at that present moment. The present moment is the most
important thing, and the second most important thing is what immediately
precedes it.

      That is why sometimes what a particular action may initially
suggest to us, may change condition as all movements have to be
confirmed or rejected by the subsequent price action.

       There is no point in keeping a scenario permanently active. Many
detractors of technical analysis use this very thing to try to discredit it.
They see an approach and cannot conceive of the fact that it can be
modified. The reality is that the market is not static and that every
moment is unique where new data keeps coming in uninterruptedly.

      This is why we will sometimes be forced to vary the sentiment of a
behavior and therefore the label we initially gave it. As we have already
mentioned, labels are not really important; what is important is the action
behind them, what that movement suggests to us. And what that
movement suggests to us is determined by the action that follows it.

       It may be that what at first appears to us to be a shakeout with a test
function in Phase C (to give rise to the breakout and continuation out of
range), is simply a test denoting intentionality in that direction. But we
can only assess this after seeing the subsequent price action.




       For example, if a potential Spring fails to develop even one bullish
move that denotes some strength (at least a minorSOS), that action would
have to change sentiment and instead of seeing it as a bearish jolt that
biases us directionally to the upside, see it more as a test of weakness.

       In the example chart, as the price is at point 1 we would say that we
are in a potential Spring situation. When we see that it does not develop
any signs of strength our sentiment about the stock should be changing
and when it makes a new low at point 2 the label should be a simple test.
       In addition, it is also important to keep in mind that we can only
pose solid scenarios on the next move and never beyond. Based on what
the price has been doing, we will give probability that a certain move will
develop later. And when this is finished, we will be in a position to
propose the next one. It makes no sense that for example we are in Phase
B and we are already suggesting the possibility of a cumulative or
distributive scheme. This is totally out of place.




       And herein lies one of the advantages of the Wyckoff methodology,
in the fact that it provides us with a clear roadmap, a context on which to
wait for price movements. When the price is in a position of potential
bearish shock (Spring) and our analysis confirms it, we will wait for the
subsequent bullish breakout move. And when this develops in the way
and form that we expect (with increasing price and volume), we will be
able to pose the next pullback move to the level of the broken structure.
And when we are in such a BUEC position, we will be able to evaluate to
raise the subsequent trend movement out of the range.

      This is the dynamic, it is not a question of inventing anything but
simply to follow and evaluate in real time the price action and the volume
in order to propose the most probable next move.
      The reason is simple; and the reasoning is found again in the
previously seen casuistry of failed schemes:

            ❖ We do not know the intent of the traders who are
       supporting the current move. If they are short term traders who
       will close positions in the next liquidity zone or if on the contrary
       they have a longer term perspective and will continue to support
       the movement until the full development of the structure.

            ❖ We do not know whether traders with greater
       capacity may intervene. At the moment of truth, in the test after
       the breakout that would confirm the directionality of the
       structure, aggressive traders with a greater ability to move the
       market may appear, pushing in the opposite direction, since in the
       longer term they may have a different vision.
    2.3 HOW TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN
   ACCUMULATION AND DISTRIBUTION?



This is the most recurrent doubt and it is totally logical because if we had
found the objective answer, we would have finally found the definitive
strategy to make money easily.

       But no, unfortunately this is not the case. In real time it is not
possible to know what it is really about; whether it is about accumulation
or distribution. The only time we can confirm what in that range has
happened is when the full development of the structure takes place; when
we have the cause and effect fully developed. This is the field of work of
all those who analyze charts in the past. Let us move away from this.

       When everything is finalized it is no longer of any use to us, it is
too late to take advantage of the market. We need to enter the market
before the effect of the cause is fully developed.

       When we pose a scenario we always speak in conditional terms
using the word "potential" as there is no certainty about anything. The
market is an environment of total uncertainty and our focus should be on
analyzing the traces we are observing up to the present moment as
objectively as possible with the purpose of trying to determine where the
imbalance will occur.

       As we have studied in the content of the first book "The Wyckoff
Methodology in Depth", there are certain signals that are informing us
during the creation of the cause who is taking control of the market.
Below we will make a sort of summary highlighting the most important
points to take into account when assessing market sentiment.




1. TYPE OF TEST IN PHASE A
       This is the first indication of the whole structure to be evaluated.
The generality is simple: we will divide the vertical distance of the
structure into two parts and depending on where the Secondary Test takes
place, it will give us some information about the condition of the market
up to that point.




      ❖ If the Secondary Test develops at the bottom of the structure, or
       even below the lower end, it will be indicating some underlying
       weakness.
      ❖ If the Secondary Test ends at the top of the structure, or even
       above the upper end, it will denote underlying strength.

      Analyzing the type of test in Phase A is a very early action in the
development of the structure, but it is interesting to evaluate from the
beginning with what condition the subsequent development starts. It is a
matter of adding up indications in favor of one side or the other (buyers
versus sellers).




2. TYPE OF TEST IN PHASE B AND REACTION
      This is the second of the traces with which we can evaluate the
apparent strength or weakness of the market.

      From a general point of view we will draw two clear conclusions:

      ❖ Test to the top of the structure would denote strength.

      ❖ Testing at the bottom of the structure would denote weakness.

       The logic behind these conclusions is that it is impossible for the
price to move to reach that end of the structure and even cause some
penetration if there are no major traders supporting that move with
conviction. This gives us some confidence in determining whether a move
has harmony in its development.
       Generally speaking, since it occurs at a very early stage in the
development of the structure, this type of test would denote some urgency
in the direction in which it occurs. A test at the high end suggests buying
momentum while a test at the low end would indicate great market
weakness.

       A subsequent evaluation of the price action will help us to
determine whether this movement has served to trigger the stops of
traders who are positioned on the opposite side, thus freeing the market
from resistance; or whether, on the contrary, the movement has been used
to enter aggressively in the opposite direction.
       In other words, a test of the upper part of the structure that manages
to break the highs at least slightly and reaches this liquidity zone can be
read in two ways:

      On the one hand, such a move may have served to absorb the
stop loss orders of those who are positioned short. With this they
manage to eliminate that downward pressure to subsequently initiate the
upward movement at a lower cost. This action would be confirmed later
when observing that the price finds some support and is unable to
continue falling.

       On the other hand, other large traders may have taken
advantage of such a test move to the highs to enter into a sell-off. Such
an action would be confirmed later with a visit to the lows of the
structure, a genuine representation of weakness.

      Therefore, what happens after such a test will be very useful for our
analysis. We could even be facing a Phase C test event, hence the
importance of evaluating the subsequent price reaction. An inability to
visit the opposite extreme would alert us of a structural failure, which
would add strength in the opposite direction; because if it really was the
shock in C the price should at least reach the opposite extreme almost
immediately.

       This type of behavior with test at one end and then structural failure
at the opposite end is generally characteristic of schemes that initiate trend
movement out of the range without prior shakeout at the full ends of the
range.

       For the case of the cumulative example the test above (UA) plus the
inability to reach the bottom denotes a lot of underlying strength and most
likely the market will generate the bullish breakout from somewhere in
the middle of the structure (LPS) without developing that Spring that we
always look for at the bottom.

       In the distribution example, the test at the bottom (ST as SOW)
followed by the inability to develop a test at the top of the structure
denotes a lot of weakness and most likely the market will develop a LPSY
as a Phase C test event.




3. THE SHAKEOUT IN PHASE C
      The third and main footprint. This is the dominant event in our
analysis and approaches.
       It is the behavior that gives us the most confidence when trading. A
shakeout into a liquidity zone plus the subsequent re-entry into the range
denotes a strong refusal of the price to continue moving in that direction
and at that point the path of least resistance is to the opposite side.

       The minimum objective of a shakeout is the visit to the opposite
end of the structure; and if we are facing the test event in Phase C, it will
give rise to the effective breakout and subsequent trend development out
of the range.

       The most important thing when analyzing a chart is the present,
what the price is doing right now in relation to what it has been doing.
And the second most important thing is the immediate prior to the present.
That is, if the current movement is preceded by a shock, that shock is the
dominant event that would mark the directional bias of our analysis.

       As the market control may vary during the development of the
structure, we need to make a continuous evaluation of the new
information coming into the market. Then, we will always give a higher
relevance to the latest information available to us.

       Does this mean that the shock is of greater importance than any
other action that has occurred previously in the range? Absolutely yes. By
the very nature of the motion, the shakeout alone should be valid enough
to bias us in favor of its direction.

       Do we then discard the previous analysis? At the operator's
discretion. From my point of view they are small traces that add up to the
analysis as a whole. It is a matter of analyzing objectively and adding up
indications in favor of one side or the other. And remember that such
shakeout does not always appear at the extremes. As we have just seen in
the previous section, knowing how to read the traces alerts us to the
imminent development of the effect.




       If we are in a situation of potential bullish breakout and previously
we have not had a Spring to the lows of the structure but we do have a test
at the top and subsequently a structural failure below, we know that such
behaviors are characteristic of cumulative schemes whose test event in
Phase C is a simple LPS and therefore we will be equally in a position to
favor the BUEC and bullish continuation.




4. PRICE AND VOLUME ACTION IN PHASE D
     This footprint simply tries to apply the Law of Effort and Result
between price action and volume.




      We want to see candlesticks that denote intentionality in favor of
the move subsequent to the shakeout and this intentionality is represented
by wide ranges and high volume (SOS/SOW bar).

       The real value of a shock is seen in whether it has continuation or
not. As already discussed, all actions must be confirmed or rejected later.
We could be in position for a potential shakeout and initially treat that
action as such; but if the subsequent move that is the breakout of the
structure does not develop, market sentiment changes.

      The shakeout is a search for liquidity but which must also be
capable of subsequently generating a move with some momentum that at
a minimum reaches the opposite end of the structure and preferably
causes its breakout.

    For example, if we look at a potential UpThrust After Distribution
(UTAD), ideally we would want to see that it is followed by a move with
strong bearish momentum that manages to break the lows of the structure
to continue the distributive development. If due to the condition of the
market it fails to break the structure, we should at least require it to reach
that low leaving such a move as a minor Sign of Weakness (mSOW).
Otherwise the market would denote some underlying strength and
question whether it was really the genuine shakeout.




      That the price is moving with wide ranges, good displacement and
an increase in volume is the ultimate representation that such a move is
being supported by large traders. The market could not develop such
moves without their intervention.

      On lower time frame charts such a move of intentionality will be
observed as a succession of lower highs and lower lows, the ideal
representation of a healthy bearish trend movement.

       In the specific action of the breakout we want to see the appearance
of high volume suggesting intentionality and absorption of all passive
orders placed in that liquidity zone. There may even be times when a wide
offset candlestick appears with a wick at its end. For example, in the event
of a bullish breakout attempt, this type of candlestick with a wick at the
top could initially suggest the possibility of a shakeout, since such a wick
objectively indicates the possibility of a sell entry. But we must remember
that we are in liquidity zone and therefore the execution of these orders
would be within the expected range. The key is the ability of buyers to
absorb this supply, keep pushing and not let the price re-enter the range.

       While it is true that we could see a genuine breakout on low volume
(due to lack of interest from the opposite side), under normal conditions
an absence of volume on such behavior would initially put us more in the
position of treating the action as a potential shakeout; although obviously
we would have to wait for the subsequent price reaction.

        Therefore, the most visual characteristic of a genuine breakout
move will be to observe a wide range candle that manages to close near
the extreme and is accompanied by high volume. We can then state that
this trace is the second in importance after the shakeout.




5. THE OVERALL VOLUME DURING RANGE DEVELOPMENT
       The third most important footprint. As a general rule the volume in
isolation during the development of the structure also shows a certain
identifiable pattern:

      ❖ Accumulation processes will be accompanied by a decreasing
       volume during the development of the structure.

      ❖ In distribution processes, high or unusual volumes can be
       identified during the development of the range.
      This is obviously a general pattern, which means that this will not
always be the case.

       For the cumulative example, a decreasing volume suggests that a
process of absorption of the available stock is taking place. As many
traders are initially willing to sell, more transactions take place, leading to
higher volumes. As time is consumed during the development of the
range, units continue to be exchanged but obviously with decreasing
intensity, which is represented as a decreasing volume. By the time the
generation of the Phase C test event is triggered, practically all the
floating supply has been eliminated.

       This is quite different in distributive processes. An important
characteristic of these schemes is that they tend to develop much faster
than cumulative ones. And this is the reason why you can see large price
fluctuations and high and constant volumes. This shorter duration forces
transactions to be executed with a certain speed; while in cumulative
campaigns a certain amount of time is consumed until stocks are
exhausted, in distribution processes the urgency to sell causes a rapid
development accompanied by high volatility.
6. ANALYSIS OF THE WEIS WAVE INDICATOR
          This tool has nothing to do with the conventional indicators known
to all.

        The Weis Wave indicator collects and analyzes volume data to
graphically represent the accumulation of transactions made by price
movements. In other words, depending on the configuration we assign to
it, the first thing the code does is to identify the start and end points of a
price movement. Once this is determined, it adds up all the volume traded
during the development of that movement and represents it in the form of
waves.




      As can be seen in the graph, all waves start from a base set at 0 (the
same as the classic vertical volume).

       This tool is basically used to perform analysis under the Law of
Effort and Result. When developing such analysis we can approach it in
different ways:

          ❖ In the development of movements. The basic rule when
           looking for harmony and divergence is that the movements that
           we initially treat of impulsive character should be accompanied
by big waves, increasing waves with respect to the previous ones,
which would suggest an increase of interest in the direction of
that movement. On the other hand, corrective movements should
be shown with small and decreasing waves in comparative terms,
suggesting a certain lack of interest in that direction.
❖ Upon reaching trading zones. Similarly, a harmony analysis
 would be obtained by identifying a large bullish wave whose
 price movement manages to break a resistance zone. The reading
 we make is that this movement of impulsive character has
 achieved the effective break. With respect to an analysis that
 would suggest divergence would be to visualize the same bullish
 move that breaks a previous resistance but does so with a very
 small Weis wave, denoting that very little volume has been traded
 and therefore suggesting that the large professional is not
 supporting the move.
       We must again be mindful of the importance of continuous
analysis. We may see a potential Spring which is followed by a bullish
move accompanied by a large Weis wave that manages to break the Creek
of the structure (so much for the ideal scenario). At that point we will be
favoring bullish continuation (potential BUEC); but strong volume may
come in and push the price back into the range and a large bearish wave is
observed, now suggesting the possibility of potential Upthrust.
       The idea is that just because we see that the footprints are in favor
of the initial approach it does not necessarily have to develop. As
previously discussed, new information is continually entering the market
and we must be aware of this. In the example above, in a potential BUEC
situation, we will need to see bearish waves that denote lack of interest in
order to more confidently propose a bullish scenario.
 2.4 HOW TO ANALYZE A CHART FROM 0?



This is one of the first barriers encountered by the beginner trader who
starts analyzing charts for the first time from the point of view of price
action and volume.

       The first thing that should be made clear is that a chart, the cleaner
the better. It is no use having a hundred thousand objects drawn on it. The
only thing we get with this is to hide the information that is really
important: the price. That is why I am in favor of, as soon as a structure
has been fully developed, eliminating absolutely everything labeled. In
this way we discard the possibility that everything plotted can interfere in
further analysis. At most, leave the levels of the structures drawn to
visually see quickly where we are coming from.

       In this type of analysis where what we seek is to understand what
the context of the market is, it is essential to start the analysis from higher
time frames to go down in time from there. But from what time frame in
particular to start? From whichever one is necessary. Generally the
weekly chart will already show all the relevant price action and it will not
be necessary to go up to the monthly chart.

      Once the chart is open, the first thing we are going to look for are
the stop events of any trend movement and the subsequent sideways
movement of the price. Operationally what we are interested in is to see
that the market is building the cause of the subsequent move; that is, that
it is in Phase B.

       Obviously on many occasions you will open the chart of an asset
and see absolutely nothing clear, or it may still be in the development of a
trend movement that has been preceded by an equilibrium range. In these
cases there is nothing to do but wait to see that change in character that
determines the appearance of Phase A.

      At other times you will identify those stop events plus the
generation of some cause in Phase B and the market may find itself in a
potential breakout/shakeout situation. This is the ideal context to move
down the time frame.

       It is a matter of identifying in this higher time frame the general
context to determine which scenario would be more interesting to work
on, whether to propose a long or short entry. In short, effectively
positioning ourselves on the longer-term chart helps us to bias the
directionality of our future scenarios.

       Until we are clear about the context of the upper chart, we will not
be able to go down in time. By context we mean the combination of
structures and operating zones:




                    2.4.1 STRUCTURES

      This is where the importance of having thoroughly studied the
whole theoretical section of the first book "The Wyckoff Methodology in
Depth" comes in. Structures provide us with a clear roadmap that will
guide our scenario approaches. For example:

      ❖ If we are in Phase B building cause, we are going to wait for
       price at the extremes of the structure to look for
       breakout/shakeout action.

      ❖ If we are in a position to confirm a shakeout, we will wait for
       price to reach the opposite extreme with some momentum.

      ❖ If we are in position for a potential genuine breakout, we will
       wait for some kind of test to the broken structure to continue the
       development out of the range.

      If we do not really know how the market moves from this point of
view of structure development it is impossible for us to pose judicious
scenarios. Therefore, the first thing to do is to internalize how these
accumulation and distribution processes generally develop:




      1. Stopping of the previous trend
      2. Construction of the cause

      3. Evaluation of the opposition

      4. Trend movement within the range

      5. Trend movement out of range




                2.4.2 TRADING ZONES

      The objective is to identify the location of the trading zones
according to price levels.




      To do this we are going to use the Volume Profile tool. Although
we will deal with this tool in depth later on, for the moment we are going
to keep in mind that it helps us to identify trading zones as well as
operating levels based on volume that will be very useful for the planning
of scenarios, among other things.
       As the market moves from one equilibrium zone to another, we
must know where we are at the present moment and what the trading
zones above and below are to take them into account as possible targets to
visit.

       The Volume Profile is a tool that adds objectivity to our analysis
and in confluence with the reading of the market offered by the Wyckoff
methodology enables us to better determine who is likely to be in control
of the market.




      2.4.3 LOWERING TEMPORALITY.
      STRUCTURES FROM HIGHEST TO
                LOWEST.

       Once this general context is clear; that based on where the price is
on the upper chart we determine as more interesting to raise longs or
shorts; and that we have identified the trading zones both above and
below, we can move down in time frame to start a new analysis there.

         We could then open the 8, 4 or 2 hour chart as an intermediate time
frame.

       Once the first more general analysis is done (on the monthly,
weekly or daily chart), we may determine that the market situation is
favorable to look for a buy entry. At that point, it would be interesting to
see the development of a minor accumulation structure that would support
such an idea. For example:
❖ If we are in a potential Spring situation (Phase C) of the above
 time frame, looking at footprints in a minor structure suggesting
 some buyer entry would be the ideal situation. On the one hand
 we are in an interesting operating situation of the macro structure
 and at the same time we observe a potential cumulative minor
 structure. We would be facing a potential cumulative minor
 structure that, if confirmed, would act as a function of the
 potential Spring of the major structure.

❖ If we are in a situation of potential BUEC (Phase D) after a
 bullish breakout and the analysis of the traces accompanies, in
 that position we should favor the continuation of the roadmap of
 the development of the structures and therefore look for a minor
 structure of re-accumulation in function of test to the broken
 structure to continue later with the trend movement out of the
 range.

❖ If we find ourselves during the development of an upward trend
 movement (Phase E), we will favor the development of minor
 structures of accumulation to try to join the longs in favor of the
        movement. We do not know the momentum with which the
        market may move and the imbalance in favor of this direction
        may have a certain urgency. This urgency can lead to the
        development of fast structures and that is where we want to be.

       This is why we move down the time frame: to look for minor
structures that fit within the context of the analysis of major structures.
This is the dynamic that we have to keep in mind with respect to context
analysis, where minor structures fit within major structures.

      But be careful because the fact that we are initially biased towards
one direction should not cause us not to be totally objective when
analyzing that minor structure, because as we already know, we would be
in key zone, liquidity zone and it is susceptible to cause the entry of large
volume to the market. In other words:




      ❖ The situation of potential Spring is also at the same time a
       situation of potential effective bearish breakout. The analysis of
       the major structure may suggest to us so far that the buyers are in
       control; but if during the development of this minor structure we
       do not observe these same indications, and on the contrary we see
        the appearance of strong selling, it would not make sense to
        continue favoring the cumulative scheme and instead we should
        consider the bearish scenario.

      ❖ The situation of potential bullish breakout is also at the same
       time a situation of potential Upthrust. If at the moment, where we
       should favor the development of a minor cumulative scheme in
       function of BUEC of the major structure, the price generates a
       minor distribution structure, this would activate the short scenario
       and would leave such a minor distributive structure in function of
       Upthrust of the major one.

      Hence the importance of being open-minded and not too rigid with
respect to directional biases. In addition, it is always necessary to have
both long and short scenarios prepared in order not to hesitate at the time
of decision making.

       If desired, it is possible to go further down in time for the analysis
of structures. The key point is to favor the development of larger
structures over smaller ones. With

      this principle in mind, it is up to the discretion of each operator to
decide how far to go down in temporality. Keep in mind that the lower
you go, the more noise you will observe.




         2.4.4 RISING TEMPORALITY.
       STRUCTURES FROM LOWEST TO
                   HIGHEST.
      Another very recurrent doubt is what type of structure to work with,
how to decide to move from one structure to another.

       It is a somewhat more complex doubt that already denotes certain
knowledge of the methodology. After internalizing all the theoretical
knowledge, the subconscious begins to reason and raise this type of
interesting doubts; and this fact is tremendously significant as a sign that a
good job is being done.

        Unlike what happens in the analysis of the context where the
development of the major structures is prioritized and the minor structures
are fitted into them; when it comes to the first identification of a structure
we will prioritize the development of the structures of lower time frames
and then move on to higher time frames if the price tells us so.

      When the market is developing the effect (trend movement) of a
previous cause (cumulative/distributive range) we will be looking at lower
time frames mainly for two reasons: to identify minor structures with
which to join the movement; and to identify the stop of such a trend
movement.

       The first of these reasons has already been discussed in the previous
section and is one of the situations for which we go down in temporality.
This time it is a question of analyzing when to move up in temporality.

      In this context of speed, minor structures may begin to develop and
these could be the origin of the development of major events visible on
higher time frames. For example; if the market is falling and we observe
the development of a rapid accumulation pattern over a small time frame,
the effect of this minor accumulation may be the generation of the
Automatic Rally event visible over a higher time frame.
      It may initially seem a bit confusing but it is not at all. I repeat the
example in reverse: If the market is rising during the development of
Phase E after an accumulation, we may observe a distributional pattern
that will act as a Buying Climax event, and the effect of that distribution
would act as an Automatic Reaction event of some higher time frame.




       Obviously it is not necessary to go down the time frame for the
identification of such events; everything will depend on the type of
trading you decide to carry out. There are experienced traders who operate
this type of minor counter trend structures but being aware that they must
be short term movements, according to the structure that has been
developed.

     It is only to exemplify under what condition it is reasonable to
move up the time frame in order to be clear about the general analysis.
       In this real example we see in confluence a failed accumulation
structure rotating into a larger accumulation structure.

       The concept has originally been explained as a minor structure that
is fully developed and which in turn is part of a larger structure. In this
example we see another way in which such a concept can appear on the
market.

       We see the unfolding of all the events of a minor cumulative
structure and how at the moment of truth, in a position of potential BUEC,
the market leaves a continuation failure to the upside. This is exactly
where the trader may want to consider as more logical the possibility of
observing all of that price action as a whole as if it were part of a larger
structure. In this way, the Automatic Rally of the longer term will be
determined from the low of the SC to the high of the UA of the smaller
structure. Likewise the JAC will now be seen as a simple test denoting
strength (UA) and from there the rest of the cumulative events will
appear.

      To highlight from the first moment the strength that existed in the
background evidenced by the inability of the price to visit the bottom of
both structures. Another interesting detail is to see that the major BUEC
develops just above the High Volume Node, which also coincides with the
VPOC of the entire structure.
 2.5 WHAT TO DO WHEN THE CONTEXT IS
             NOT CLEAR?



We may open a chart and see absolutely nothing clear. Neither a clear
trend movement, nor a sideways movement preceded by a pause. In this
situation we have two options:




     1. INCREASE THE TIME FRAME
       As we know, the smaller the time frame, the more noise we see. It
is very healthy on these types of occasions to move up in time frame to
see the big picture of where we are.

      What looks like chaos to you on intraday charts may make sense to
you on higher time frames.

       If you have done a good analysis from scratch as we suggested, you
will have moved from higher time frames to lower time frames. So,
simply stay at the time frame where you see the clearest price action and
don't go any lower.
      For example, if doing the context analysis you are well placed in
H1, go down to M15 but you don't feel comfortable there, go back up to
H1 and discard the possibility of analyzing lower charts.




     2. CHANGE ASSETS
       You may not be able to position yourself solidly on any time frame.
At this point and taking into account the amount of tradable assets there
are today, what need do we have to trade something that we don't really
see clearly? It doesn't make sense.

      Whether you trade stocks, indices, currencies, commodities or
cryptocurrencies, the number of these tradable assets is large enough that
you don't need to be forcing analysis, so if something is not clear to you,
just move on to the next one.




               2.5.1 THE CONTROLLER

      This question also comes in handy to identify one of the biggest
mistakes that some traders make when deciding to trade only one asset.
This leads them to want to control every single price movement, which
can be disastrous for the account. That word, control, may be one of the
most damaging words in the world of trading. You can control absolutely
nothing. Our focus should be on trading only the clearest setups with the
best possible risk/reward ratio.
       A very curious thing is that it often happens that the trader who
trades only one asset trades on small time frames. It is the perfect
combination for ruin. And as he will surely like the labels (for the fact of
having controlled each movement), we have a trader who is leaving his
eyes and mind trying to decipher each one of the movements and on top
of that he practically does not see what the price is doing as he will have a
1 or 2 minutes chart full of labels.

      Let's move away from this because it is impossible for anyone to
hold on like this for long. The energy expenditure is brutal and the
concentration required maintaining an optimal level of judgment is
extremely high. Very few will actually be able to do this kind of trading.
The vast majority are doomed to suffer from severe distress.

      Let's move up the time frame and cover more assets. It is certainly
good to specialize in one market (as each has its own peculiarities
regarding best times, volatility etc.), but don't focus exclusively on one.
Have a list of a few (even if they are 3 or 4) to follow and specialize in
them if you want.

       Lastly, we keep forgetting that a large part of market movements
are random in nature; and this simply means that they do not have a
directional intention behind them. As I discussed in the first pages of my
first book, some of the ranges fluctuate up and down without any
intentionality behind them, without constructing any kind of cause. It is
pure randomness. They are those ranges where you see absolutely no clear
footprint and you cannot make a judicious analysis of who might be in
control of the market. You have to be aware of this.
      PART 3. TODAY’S TRADING
            ECOSYSTEM




Although the following section is not directly related to the more
technical focus of the Wyckoff methodology, it is important and enriching
to understand the general context in which today's markets move.

       The markets have undergone a paradigm shift and have migrated in
just a few years from trades carried out entirely by people in person to
fully electronic trades thanks to technological advances.

      This has contributed to the emergence of new players in the
investment world, new ways of operating and even new markets.

       Undoubtedly, all this has led to a democratization of investment,
allowing access to the retail trader, who not so many years ago was
banned from participating. In this respect, it is no coincidence that most
retail operators are losing out. The whole industry is set up so that their
participation simply serves as another (very small) source of providing
liquidity to the market.

      It is important to keep your feet on the ground. The world of
trading and investing is far too complex for a retail trader at home, with
an internet connection and a computer, to make any return on his capital.
It has everything going against it, starting with the fact that it is a field
dominated by large institutions which spend huge amounts of money on
both developing powerful tools and hiring the most skilled people.

       We will now take a very basic look at some of the lesser-known
aspects of today's trading ecosystem that are of some relevance and could
influence our trading.
       3.1 TYPES OF FINANCIAL MARKET
                PARTICIPANTS



Understanding those who have the ability to influence price movements
gives us a more robust viewpoint when making trading and investment
decisions.

      Financial markets are made up of a variety of players with different
ways of operating based on their needs at that specific moment in time.

       One of the biggest mistakes we can make is to think that all market
movements are orchestrated by a single entity; or to distinguish between
professional and non-professional traders. When these terms are used, as
well as "strong hands" and "weak hands", they are used from the point of
view of understanding who has more control of the market, not with the
objective of seeing it as a war between institutional versus retail, because
as we know, in the most traded assets, retailers have little or nothing to do
with it.

       It should be borne in mind that everything also depends on the
volume traded in each particular asset. The higher the volume, the more
intervention will come from large participants.

      For example, one of the largest traded assets in the world, the
American S&P 500 index, is almost entirely controlled by large
institutions, where 90% or more of the volume comes from them. It is a
battle between them. No trade can be executed without one institution
being willing to take one side of the position and another institution being
willing to take the opposite side. The market will not be able to move the
slightest tick if there is not an institution behind every move.

       Conversely, assets that move very little volume can be influenced
by less able traders. This is why it is generally not recommended to trade
assets with low liquidity, in order to avoid possible manipulations.

       Our objective therefore is to analyze the behavior of the chart to try
to determine on which side most of the institutional money is.

       We will categorize the different market participants according to
their intention:




HEDGING
       This is basically the execution of financial transactions aimed at
nullifying or reducing risk. They consist of the purchase or sale of a
product that is correlated with the asset on which the hedge is to be
established.

      While the main objective of hedging is to limit risk, it can also be
used to secure a latent profit or to preserve the value of a fixed asset.

      These traders do not care about the price direction as it is not the
core business of their company. They do not trade with a directional intent
and take a more long-term view.
       Although there are different ways in which hedging can be carried
out, the most traditional form of hedging is producer-oriented hedging:

      An example would be an airline company that buys oil futures as a
resource to balance its fuel costs.

      Another example might be a large international importing and
exporting company that purchases foreign exchange to hedge against
possible price changes.

      Market makers would also be included in this category as they
could go to the market depending on their needs with the objective of
keeping their total positions risk neutral.




SPECULATION
       Unlike hedgers, who basically trade to reduce their exposure to
risk, speculative traders take on risk when opening their positions.

       If given the current market conditions they consider the price of the
asset in question to be cheap they will buy and vice versa if they consider
it to be expensive with the sole objective of profiting from the price
movement.

       Here we find hedge funds, funds, trading firms and in general any
institution that operates directionally in the market to seek profitability.

       They cover different timeframes and execute trades also through
high frequency algorithms.

      They are the most active traders in the financial market. Basically,
they focus on the search for liquidity zones since, due to the large amount
of volume they move; they need this counterpart to match their orders.

       There is a common misconception that all institutions are
profitable. Many of these institutions are the preferred victims in the
financial market as they move significant amounts of volume and possibly
have an unsound trading approach.

       Although not purely speculative in nature, some options traders
could be included in this category because if they have a large open
position in the options market, they are very likely to also turn to the
futures market to try to defend it if necessary.




ARBITRAGE
       It consists of taking advantage of financial market imperfections.
These traders observe some inefficiency in prices and execute transactions
with the aim of correcting it and adjusting prices.

      There are different ways of arbitrage: either trading a single
product, trading different correlated products, trading between different
markets and even trading between contracts with the same and different
expiration dates.

       An example would be trading a de-correlation between two markets
of the same asset, such as the spot market and the future. We can have for
example the cross currency of the euro against the dollar (EURUSD) and
the derivative in the futures market (6E). An arbitrage strategy will take
advantage of the minuscule price difference that may exist between these
two markets to obtain an economic benefit.



      Away from this we also have the Central Banks. They are the ones
with the greatest capacity, since they direct the monetary policies of
countries mainly by setting interest rates.

       Of the types seen, the only one that would enter the market with the
directional objective of adding pressure to one side or the other would be
the speculative trader. The rest of the transactions would have different
intentionality but would still ultimately be represented on price.

      The fact that not all trading is speculative in nature is a very
important factor to consider. Many make the mistake of thinking that
every trade has directional interest behind it and in most cases this is not
the case. There are many types of participants that interact in the market
and the needs of each one are different.

       In addition to the intentionality of the trade, it is worth highlighting
the different uses of timeframes used by some traders and others. While
some take into account the short term, others maintain medium or long
term strategies. The key point is that each and every one of the market
movements is being supported by a large institution and that at any time
another one with a longer-term perspective and a greater capacity to
influence the price may enter the market.
             3.2 ELECTRONIC MARKETS



Since 2007, exchanges have gone from being controlled by humans to a
fully automated and electronic environment where really all there are
computers in charge of processing and matching orders.




      With the advent of new technologies, computer advances and
regulatory changes in the financial world, the importance of speed in
transmitting and receiving data has become increasingly important,
reaching the current moment where electronic trading represents the
majority of traded volume.

      The most traded products such as futures, equities and index CDS
show the highest degrees of electronification at 90%, 80% and 80%
respectively. On the other hand, corporate bonds are at the lower end of
the spectrum as they are more bespoke products, accounting for 40% and
25%.




       All these developments have improved market efficiency by adding
liquidity, reducing costs, increasing speed of execution, improving risk
management and enabling access to specific markets.




        3.2.1 ALGORITHMIC TRADING

       It is a process of executing orders based on well-defined and
codified rules carried out by a computer automatically, thus avoiding
human involvement.

       It uses complex statistical and econometric models in advanced
platforms to make decisions electronically and independently.

       It mainly uses price, time and volume as variables; and was
developed to take advantage of the speed and data processing advantages
that computers have over human traders.
       These strategies interpret market signals and implement trading
strategies automatically based on them, with trades of varying lengths.




        The increase in market share in recent years of algorithmic trading
in all types of assets is simply spectacular, and forecasts for the following
years follow the same dynamics.

        One of the reasons for such growth is due to the emergence of
artificial intelligence in the financial sector.




      3.2.2 HIGH FREQUENCY TRADING
       High Frequency Trading is a type of algorithmic trading but applied
on the scale of microseconds trying to profit from very small changes in
asset prices.




      It is based on the use of mathematical algorithms with which orders
are analyzed and executed according to market conditions. They perform
thousands of trades in a short period of time, making money
systematically and with a high probability.

      Their main advantage is the speed of processing and execution,
which they achieve thanks to the dedication of powerful computers. This
is why the general public who operate from home simply does not have
the means to access this type of trading. It is therefore a style reserved
almost exclusively for institutional traders with large capital.
       Although in Europe it is slightly lower, the share of the American
equity market is still over 50% of the total volume traded. Interesting to
note how the 2009 crisis caused a decline in HFT participation mainly due
to increased competitiveness, high costs and low volatility.

       Do not confuse High Frequency Trading with the automatic
systems that can be created by a retail trader (which can fall into the
category of algorithmic trading). Generally these types of tools (known as
EAs, robots or bots) are not usually very effective; something very
different from High Frequency Trading, which cost millions of dollars
and have been developed by large financial firms to operate with
significant amounts on a daily basis.




HOW DO HIGH FREQUENCY ALGORITHMS AFFECT US?
      The fact that in today's markets most of the traded volume comes
from high frequency algorithms does not greatly influence the structure-
based analysis that we can do mainly because we are not competing to
exploit the same anomalies.
       While our analyses seek to take advantage of a deterministic side of
the market where we try to elucidate who has more control (buyers or
sellers), high frequency algorithms seem to be more in the random side of
the market, mainly because of their categorization: arbitrage, directional
(momentum and event-driven) and market making (liquidity ratio)
strategies.

       While it is true that some algorithms may execute directional
strategies (with the objective of benefiting from price movements), these
cover the shorter term and although they may distort our analysis, the
advantage offered by the Wyckoff methodology is that it provides us with
a structural framework thanks to which we can minimize some of the
noise that originates on the smaller scales and obtain a more objective
feeling of the current market conditions taking into account a larger
context than that covered by these algorithms.
3.3 OVER THE COUNTER (OTC) MARKETS



This is a type of electronic market where financial assets are traded
between two parties without the control and supervision of a regulator, as
it is the case with stock exchanges and futures markets.

       The main difference between centralized markets (On-Exchange)
and non-centralized markets (Off-Exchange) is that in centralized markets
there is a single order book which is responsible for linking all the
participants in that market; whereas in non-centralized markets there are
multiple order books (as many as there are market makers) where the lack
of transparency with respect to market depth is evident by only showing
the price of the BID and the ASK.

       In recent years the US market has undergone a process of
fragmentation where more and more decentralized markets have been
created. Currently, U.S. equity liquidity is divided among about 88
different sources, with almost 40% of trading taking place in non-
centralized markets.
      Within the non-centralized markets we find different brokers based
on their treatment of client orders. On the one hand, there are those who
have a Dealing Desk (known as Market Makers) and, on the other hand,
those who do not have a Dealing Desk (Non Dealing Desk), who act as
intermediaries between the client and the rest of the market.

        This second type, non-dealing desk brokers, is the one with whom
it is recommended to work. The reason is because Market Makers are in
charge of offering the final price of the asset, making the process less
transparent.

       Having the ability to take the counterpart in the trades of their
clients opens the door to possible conflicts of interest, because if the client
wins the broker loses and vice versa. And obviously the broker will do
everything possible to keep his business profitable.

       When the fact that the owner of the market is in charge of offering
the final price together with the possibility that he is at the same time the
counterparty, one of the main dangers for the retail trader appears and that
is that he is exposed to suffer some kind of manipulation in the price
movements.

      It is also important to know that, due to the very nature of this type
of non-centralized markets, there may be different prices for the same
asset. In other words, if we want to trade the EUR/USD currency cross,
each market maker will offer us a different price and volume.




HOW DO OTC MARKETS AFFECT US?
      The problem we encounter here is that the analysis we do under this
type of market will be based on data that, although it could be a
meaningful and valid representation of the whole market, in reality it does
not genuinely represent all the price and volume data.

       In order to reliably have this data we will need to analyze the asset
under a centralized market. Continuing with the EUR/USD example, we
should analyze the futures market (centralized market) which corresponds
to the ticker $6E.

       Therefore, if we do not have the economic capacity (sufficient
capital) to operate this futures market, we can analyze the asset in this
futures market and execute the trading through another more affordable
financial derivative such as the CFD (Contract For Different) with a good
broker (which is not a market maker). An intermediate option would be to
trade the small version of the future, the micro future, which in the case of
EUR/USD corresponds to the ticker $M6E.

       If we open a chart of the future (6E) and the CFD (EURUSD) we
will see that the price movements are practically the same even though
they are different markets. This is possible thanks to an arbitrage process
carried out by high-frequency algorithms that occurs systematically
between both markets.
                       3.4 DARK POOLS



A Dark Pool is a private market (Off-Exchange) that puts institutional
investors in contact and facilitates the exchange of financial assets with
the peculiarity that its transactions are not reported immediately, the
amount traded (the volume) not being known until 24 hours later.




      Trading in non-centralized stock markets in the U.S. is
approximately 35%, with Dark Pools accounting for 16 to 18%. And
according to a Bloomberg study, overall Dark Pools trading already
accounts for over 30% of total trading volume.
       Dark Pools' market share of European equity trading has expanded
rapidly in recent years, growing from 1% in 2009 to 8% in 2016.

       When a large institution wants to buy or sell a huge amount of an
asset they go to this type of market mainly because they know that if they
access the public market they will find it difficult to find a counterparty,
that they will possibly get a worse price in addition to being exposed to
predatory techniques such as Front Running executed by high frequency
algorithms. In this type of markets they avoid this negative impact and at
the same time they get better commissions since they save the fees
required by the public markets.

      Contrary to what many people may think, Dark Pools are highly
regulated as their owners are registered with the SEC (Securities and
Exchange Commission) and FINRA (The Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority) and are therefore subject to regular audits and examinations
similar to those of a public market.

      In addition to private financial institutions, there are public
exchanges that have their own Dark Pools such as the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE), the most traded and liquid exchange in the world.

       The CME (Chicago Mercantile Exchange), which is the market
with the largest number of options and futures contracts in the world, also
has its own Dark Pool and offers this opaque trading service through what
they have called "Block Trades". On their own website they explain in
detail the information in this regard, to highlight:

       “A Block Trade is a privately traded futures, options or
combinations transaction that is allowed to be executed apart from the
public auction market. Participation in Block Trades is restricted to
participants in eligible contracts, as that term is defined in the Commodity
Exchange Act.

      Rule 526 ("Block Trades") governs Block Trades trading on the
CME, CBOT, NYMEX and COMEX products. Block Trades are
permitted in specific products and are subject to minimum transaction size
requirements that vary by product, transaction type and execution time.
Block Trades may be executed at any time at a fair and reasonable price".




HOW DO DARK POOLS AFFECT US?
      The activity conducted in Dark Pools have an important role in
determining intraday returns and the uncertainty that can be related to
them, thus having important microstructural implications.

       It turns out that we may be analyzing an asset in which very
significant transactions may have taken place in a hidden manner and we
obviously cannot even assess the buyer's intentions.

       These transactions, not being determined by the supply and demand
of the public market, do not have an immediate impact on the price
formation; but there are studies that affirm that the operators of the public
markets react to the report of orders executed in the Dark Pool once it is
released, being able to significantly alter the analysis of the interaction up
to that moment.
          3.5 ARE MARKETS RANDOM OR
                 DETERMINISTIC?



This issue is another of the great debates within the trading community
and undoubtedly generates great controversy. The vast majority of those
who position themselves in favor of the randomness of the market do so
with the aim of discrediting the usefulness of technical analysis. On the
other hand, we have those who observe each and every price movement
and give it an intention, a big mistake. Not everything is black and white.

      Randomness is based on the premise of market efficiency while
determinism (non-randomness) is based on market inefficiency.

       The random markets approach suggests that the current price
already reflects all the information about past events and even the events
that the market expects to take place in the future. In other words, all the
information about the asset is absolutely discounted and therefore it is not
possible to predict the future price action. The reasoning is that, when
participants try to take advantage of new information, together they
neutralize this advantage. This would lead to the conclusion that it is not
possible to take advantage of the market's own interpretation, unless the
trader has access to privileged information.
        The deterministic market approach suggests that price movements
are influenced by external factors so that by knowing what these factors
are, it is possible to predict future price action and therefore, it is possible
to profit from the market's interpretation.

       Randomness refers to the fact that this market movement has no
logical intention behind it; it is simply a price fluctuation. Randomness
arises as a result of the innumerable variables that take place in the
market. No one can know how the other market participants are going to
act. If anyone did, they would have a deterministic system whose
predictions would be right every time.

       On the other hand, if the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH) and
the randomness of the market were valid, no one could make profits on a
recurring basis. And it has been proven throughout history that this is not
the case. We all know great traders in the financial markets who have
managed to win with different approaches (technical, fundamental and
quantitative). In addition to this fact, the hypothesis of efficient markets
has come in for a lot of criticism mainly because it assumes rational
behavior of agents in their decision making.

      On the other hand, financial markets cannot be modeled as a totally
deterministic process where there is no randomness, since this would
mean that there would be strategies with a 100% probability of success,
and this (as far as we know) is not the case either.




         3.5.1 THE ADAPTIVE MARKETS
                  HYPOTHESIS
      We therefore conclude that financial markets are composed of a
percentage of randomness and another percentage of determinism,
without knowing how much weight each has.

       This theory would be supported by the Adaptive Markets
Hypothesis (AMH) which shows the efficiency of financial markets not as
a present or absent characteristic, but as a quality that varies according to
the market conditions (the environment, context), which are determined
by the interactions between its agents.

      This hypothesis has been presented by the American financial
economist Andrew W. Lo in his book Adaptive Markets published in
2017 and is mainly supported by:

      1. The efficiency of the market depends on its conditions. This
         changing characteristic is the result of participants' interactions
         which in turn depend on market conditions.

      2. The agent is not totally rational and is subject to cognitive
         biases. A purely rational model cannot be applied since
         participants form expectations based on different factors.
         Moreover, different expectations can be created with the same
         information, not to mention the fact that each agent has different
         degrees of risk aversion.

       Although the author refers to agents as personal individuals, this is
equally applicable to the current trading ecosystem where we have already
mentioned that practically all actions are made electronically by
algorithms. This fact does not modify the basis of the adaptive hypothesis
since, regardless of the market participant and the way in which he
interacts with the rest of the market, he will make his decisions based on
the valuations, motives or needs that he has at a given moment; and that
given moment will be conditioned by different factors; factors that will
change over time and thus change the valuations, motives or needs of the
participants.

       The HMA does not focus on discrediting the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis, it simply treats it as incomplete. It places more value on
changing market conditions (due to the arrival of new information) and
how participants may react to them. It focuses on the fact that rationality
and irrationality (efficiency and inefficiency) can coexist at the same time
in the market depending on the conditions.




     3.5.2 WHERE DOES THE WYCKOFF
           METHODOLOGY FIT IN?

       Landing it on what concerns us, the reading of the market under the
principles of the Wyckoff methodology is based on a deterministic market
event: the law of Cause and Effect and for the market to develop an effect
(trend) there must first be a cause (accumulation/distribution). There are
other deterministic events that can offer an advantage, such as seasonality.

       An example of random behavior could be seen in High Frequency
Algorithms. We have already discussed some of their uses and they are
the perfect example of forces that have the ability to move the market and
that do not necessarily have a directional logic behind them.

       Finally, most studies that defend the randomness of the market use
classic chartist patterns such as triangles, shoulder head shoulder, flags
etc. or some price pattern without an underlying logic behind it to confirm
the lack of predictability of technical analysis in general. Our approach to
trading the markets is far removed from all this.

       There are studies where using an analytical tool as simple as trend
lines has shown a non-random behavior in financial markets being able to
even exploit an anomaly with which to obtain certain returns.
  PART 4. THE IMPORTANCE OF
            VOLUME




As we have seen, in the context in which we currently find ourselves,
volume has become even more significant than in past decades. There is
more and more money moving through all the financial markets and this
has caused certain changes; from the way of trading to the appearance of
new tools.

       At the beginning of the 20th century, the markets, operated entirely
manually, were guided mainly by the cognitive biases of their
participants. Emotions such as fear and greed were present and caused a
large part of the decisions made by their participants. This irrationality of
the individual led to very profitable situations for the well-informed
traders of the time.
        As everyone knows by now, the current ecosystem is that the vast
majority of traded volume is done electronically, that huge amounts of
volume are moved on a daily basis and that in order for all these orders to
be filled, it is necessary to highlight the concepts of counterparty, liquidity
and order matching; in short, the importance of volume.

      In this section we will study auction theory in depth and look at
some tools that will allow us to make a more accurate analysis of volume
data.
          4.1 AUCTION MARKET THEORY



Auction theory, as it is known in English, was born mainly from the
studies by J.P. Steidlmayer on the Market Profile. Subsequently, together
with other authors such as James Dalton and Donald L. Jones, he defined
a series of concepts that constitute this theory.

       It is based on the fact that the market, with the priority objective of
facilitating negotiation among its participants and under the principles of
the law of supply and demand, will always move in search of efficiency,
also known as equilibrium or fair value.

        Efficiency means that buyers and sellers are comfortable
negotiating and neither has clear control. That comfort comes because,
based on current market conditions, the valuations of both are very
similar. The way this equilibrium is visually observed on a price chart is
with a continuous rotation (price ranges). This price lateralization
represents this equilibrium. It is evidence of the facilitation of trading and
is the state in which the market is always looking to be.

      On the other hand, we have the moments of inefficiency or
imbalance and these are represented in the trend movements. When new
information reaches the market, it can cause the value perceived by both
buyers and sellers of the asset to change, generating a disagreement
between them. One of the two will take control and move the price away
from the previous equilibrium zone, offering a profitable trading
opportunity. What is evident in this context is that the market is not
facilitating trading and is therefore considered an inefficient condition.




       The market will be constantly moving in search and confirmation
of value; in situations where buyers and sellers are in a position to
exchange stock. When this happens it is because the valuations that these
participants have on the price are very similar. At that moment the
negotiation will again generate a new equilibrium zone. This cycle will
repeat itself over and over again in an uninterrupted manner.

       The general idea is that the market will move from one
equilibrium area to another through trend movements and that these will
be initiated when the market sentiment of both buyers and sellers about
the current value differs causing the imbalance. The market will now
begin the search for the next area that generates consensus among the
majority of participants about the security.
      It should be noted that the market spends most of its time during
periods of equilibrium, which is logical due to the nature of the market
based on favoring negotiation among its participants. This is where the
accumulation and distribution processes take place, which as we all know
is where the Wyckoff methodology focuses.




                      4.1.1 VARIABLES

       The auction process in the financial markets is fundamentally based
on value. In order to try to decipher where such value is found, three
additional elements need to be evaluated:




PRICE
        In the auction mechanism price is used as a discovery tool. The
facilitation of trading is carried out by price movement, which fluctuates
up and down exploring different levels with the objective of seeing how
participants react to such exploration.

       These price movements herald opportunities. If the participants
respond to this exploration by observing the price as fair, it will provoke
negotiation between them. Conversely, if these discoveries of new price
levels are not perceived as attractive to both participants, it will lead to
rejection.
TIME
       When the market promotes an opportunity (reaches an attractive
level), it will use time to regulate the duration that the opportunity will be
available.

      The price will spend very little time in those zones that are
advantageous to one of the two sides (buyers or sellers).

       A zone of efficiency or equilibrium will be characterized by a
higher consumption of time; while a zone of inefficiency or imbalance
will be represented by a short consumption of time.




VOLUME
        Volume represents the activity, the amount of an asset that has been
exchanged. This quantity suggests the interest or disinterest at certain
levels.

      Based on volume there are areas that are more valuable than others.
The basic rule is that the more activity a certain area sees, the higher the
value assigned to it by market participants.


                    P r i c e + T i m e + Vo l u m e = Va l u e


      These three elements are responsible for giving us a logical
perspective on, based on current conditions, where market participants
consider the value of a particular asset to be.
       Through price the market discovers new levels, time consumption
suggests that there is some acceptance in that new area and finally volume
generation confirms that participants have created a new value zone where
they trade comfortably.

       As we know, conditions are changeable and therefore continuous
re-evaluation of these elements is needed. Knowing where the value is a
key as it defines the market condition and based on this we will be able to
put forward different trading ideas.




          4.1.2 PERCEPTION OF VALUE

       The market is constantly rotating between two phases: horizontal
development (equilibrium) or vertical development (imbalance).
Horizontal development suggests agreement among participants while
vertical development is a market in search of value, in search of
participants to negotiate with.

       The fact that the price is moving comfortably in a trading range
(horizontal development) represents acceptance in that zone, it is a context
where price and value coincide according to the participants. When the
market is in a trending state (vertical development) price and value do not
coincide; in this context price will move ahead and value will follow or
not (as a sign of acceptance and rejection).
       In an equilibrium area the fairest price will be located in the middle
and the extremes both above and below will represent levels that are
unfair or not accepted by the participants.

       Since the fairest value is located in the middle of the range, a move
to the upper end will be seen by buyers as an expensive price and at the
same time sellers will consider it cheap, so their actions will lead to send
the price back to the fairest zone. Similarly a visit to the lower end of the
range will be seen as cheap by buyers and expensive by sellers, leading to
a further turn to the upside.

      It is nothing more or less than the typical range trading that we all
know where you look to buy at lows and sell at highs hoping that the price
will continue to reject those extremes. And normally the market will
continue to do so until its condition changes.

       The interesting thing comes when an imbalance occurs and the
price leaves the value zone.

     What will happen then? When the price leaves a trading zone a
change in the perception of value can happen.

       The trader's task is now to assess whether these new price quote
levels are accepted or rejected. Price is ahead of the other two variables in
determining potential areas of value, but it is time in the first instance and
volume in the last instance that will confirm whether that new area is
accepted or rejected.

      We interpret acceptance to a new area when the price manages to
hold (time consuming) and contracts begin to be exchanged between
buyers and sellers (volume), all this represented as a certain lateralization
of the price. Conversely, we would identify rejection when the price
quickly reverts back to its old value area denoting lack of interest and
evidenced by a sharp turn.

       All horizontal developments end when there is no longer agreement
among the participants about the value; while all vertical developments
end when the price reaches a zone where there is agreement among them
again. This is the continuous cycle of the market. This idea in itself is very
powerful and with the right approach trading strategies could be built
around it.
       As with one of the universal principles of technical analysis (price
discounts everything), we do not need to go into what actually produces
this change in the participants' perception of value. We know that based
on the current conditions, based on the information available at that
precise moment, all participants give a valuation to the price of the asset.
Subsequently, something may happen at a fundamental level that changes
this perception, but the beauty of this approach is that it removes us from
the need to know and interpret what has happened to change the
participants' perception.

       It is important to emphasize that this auction theory is universal and
can therefore be used to evaluate any type of financial market, regardless
of the time frame used.




     4.1.3 THE FOUR STEPS OF MARKET
                 ACTIVITY

      This is a process with which Steidlmayer represented the different
phases through which the market passes during the development of its
movements.

      The four phases are:

      1. Trend phase. Vertical development, price in imbalance in favor
         of one direction.

      2. Stopping phase. Traders begin to appear in the opposite
         direction and the stop of the previous trend movement occurs.
         The limits of the upper and lower range are established.

      3. Lateralization phase. Horizontal development. Trading around
         the stop price and within the limits of the new equilibrium range.

      4. Transition phase. The price leaves the range and a new
         imbalance begins in search of value. This movement may be a
         reversal or a continuation of the previous trend movement.




       Once the transition phase is over, the market is in a position to start
a new cycle. This protocol will run uninterrupted and is observable in all
time frames.

      Visually up to step three a P or b-shaped profile would be observed.
The formation of this type of profile as well as the proposal of a type of
operative based on it will be seen in more depth later.

      Structural traders will be familiar with this four-step protocol
because it is essentially exactly the development from Phase A to Phase E
proposed by the Wyckoff methodology:

      1. Stop the previous trend
2. Build the cause
      3. Assess the opposition

      4. Initiate the trend movement

      5. Confirm directionality




       Although Richard Wyckoff, as well as his later students and other
traders who have contributed to the dissemination of his ideas were based
solely on analytical tools and principles of technical analysis, we see that
they already implicitly worked these concepts proposed in the auction
theory even if they did not use such terms.

      That is why it is considered the only technical analysis approach
based on a real underlying logic: auction theory and the law of supply and
demand.
   4.2 THE LAW OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND



This is the basic law on which the auction theory is based and therefore
governs all price changes. Initially the studies that Richard Wyckoff
proposed on this law told us that:

      ❖ If demand was greater than supply, the price of the product
       would rise.

      ❖ If supply was greater than demand, the price of the product
       would go down.

      ❖ If supply and demand were in equilibrium, the price of the
       product would remain the same.




            4.2.1 COMMON ERRORS OF
                 INTERPRETATION

      This idea is very general and should be qualified since a series of
conceptual errors have been generated around this law of supply and
demand.

      Error No. 1: Prices rise because there are more buyers than
      sellers or fall because there are more sellers than buyers.

       In the market there are always the same number of buyers and
sellers; since for someone to buy, there must be someone to sell to him.
No matter how much someone wants to buy, as long as there is no seller
willing to offer the counterpart, it is impossible for the negotiation to take
place.

     The key lies in the attitude (aggressive or passive) that traders take
when participating in the market.

      Error No. 2: Prices go up because there is more demand than
      supply or they go down because there is more supply than
      demand.

       The problem with this statement is to call demand everything that
has to do with buying and supply everything that has to do with selling. In
reality they are different concepts and it is convenient to separate them
when referring to one or the other.

       Supply and Demand are the limit orders that both buyers and sellers
place in the BID and ASK columns pending execution, which is known as
liquidity.




 4.2.2 BID/ASK, SPREAD AND LIQUIDITY
       There is no single price in financial markets. This is obvious but not
understood by many people. When a participant goes to the market, he
finds two prices: the buying and the selling price.

       BID. The BID column is the part of the order book where buyers
come to place their bid (limit buy orders) and where sellers come to match
their ask orders. The highest price level within the BID column is known
as the Best BID and represents the best price at which to sell.

       ASK. The ASK column is the part of the order book where sellers
go to place their pending sell (bid) orders and where buyers go to find the
counterpart for their purchases. The lowest price level within the ASK
column is known as the Best ASK and represents the best price at which
to buy.




       Therefore, it is the order execution mechanism that determines the
price. The difference between the BID and the ASK is called the Spread
and is an indicator to be taken into account to assess the liquidity of the
asset. The lower the Spread, the more liquid it is.

       Liquidity is an extremely important concept. It is the amount of
volume that an asset trades. We should try to trade assets the more liquid
the better, as this will mean that it will be more difficult for a large
individual trader to have the ability to move the price. It is therefore a
measure to avoid possible manipulation. If you are trading an asset that
trades very little volume, it is likely that if a large institution enters, it can
move the price with relative ease. These environments should be avoided.




   4.2.3 TYPES OF PARTICIPANTS BASED
           ON THEIR BEHAVIOR

       The key element that clarifies the errors in the interpretation of the
Law of Supply and Demand is the behavior of traders, since they can
participate in the market in different ways:

       ❖ Aggressive. Liquidity takers through the use of "at market"
        orders. They have urgency to enter and attack the Best BID and
        Best ASK where the limit orders remain located. This type of
        aggressive orders is the real engine of the market since they are
        the ones that initiate the transactions.

       ❖ Passive. Liquidity creators through the use of "limit" orders.
        Sellers create supply by leaving their orders pending execution in
        the ASK column; and buyers create demand by leaving their
        orders placed in the BID column.
     4.2.4 HOW DOES PRICE MOVEMENT
                              OCCUR?

        We come then to the moment of examining what must happen for
the price to move. The idea here is clear: it takes the aggressive
participation of traders to produce a change in price. Passive orders
represent intent in the first instance, and if executed they have the ability
to stop a move, but not the ability to make the price move. This requires
initiative.
INITIATIVE
      For the price to move upwards, buyers have to buy all the sell (bid)
orders that are available at that price level and also continue to buy
aggressively to force the price up one level to find new sellers to trade
with.

       Passive buy orders cause the downward movement to slow down,
but by themselves cannot drive the price up. The only orders that have the
ability to move the price upwards are buy-to-market orders or those
whose crossing orders become buy-to-market orders (such as stop losses
on short positions).




     For the price to move downward, sellers have to acquire all the buy
(demand) orders that are available at that price level and continue to push
downward forcing the price to go in search of buyers at lower levels.

      Passive sell orders cause the upward movement to slow down, but
do not have the ability to drive the price down on their own. The only
orders that have the ability to move the price downward are market sells
or those whose crossing orders become market sells (Stop Loss of long
positions).




EXHAUSTION
        The price needs aggressiveness to move, but it is very interesting to
take into account also that the lack of interest from the opposite side can
facilitate this task.

      An absence of supply can facilitate the price rise just as an absence
of demand can facilitate its fall.
      As supply withdraws, this lack of interest will be represented as
fewer contracts placed in the ASK column and therefore the price can
more easily move upward with very little buying power.

        Conversely, if it is demand that withdraws, it will be visualized
with a reduction in the contracts that buyers have placed in the BID and
this will cause the price to be able to move lower with very little selling
initiative.




4.2.5 HOW DO MARKET TURNS OCCUR?

      Keep in mind that the market, in order to facilitate trading, will go
up in search of sellers and down in search of buyers; in other words, it
will always move towards the equilibrium point where supply and
demand will be equalized.
      Moreover, logic leads us to think that as the price rises, the interest
of buyers decreases (they see the price as increasingly more expensive)
and the interest of sellers increases (they see the price as increasingly
cheaper); and as the price falls, the interest of sellers decreases and that of
buyers increases.

        In a rising market, as long as the buying initiative is able to
consume all the liquidity (supply) found at higher levels, the price will
continue to rise. On the other hand, in bear markets, as long as the selling
initiative is able to consume all the liquidity (demand) found at lower
levels, the price will continue to fall.

       At the moment of a market turn, we will normally always have a
three-step process:

      1. Exhaustion

      2. Absorption

      3. Initiative




       To reverse an upward movement, the lack of interest (exhaustion)
of the buyers to continue buying, the first entry of sale by the big
operators in a passive way (absorption) and the aggressiveness (initiative)
of the sellers will be combined.
       Oppositely for the bullish turn example: sellers' exhaustion, passive
positioning through absorption of sales and buying initiative with
aggression in the ASK.

      In essence this three-step protocol is nothing more than
accumulation and distribution processes regardless of the time scale on
which they take place.
                     4.3 ORDER TYPES



When participating in the market we can do so mainly by using four
different types of orders.




     ❖ Market. Aggressive order that is executed at the best available
      buy and sell price (Best BID/ASK). Immediate execution that
      guarantees the entry to the market but not the specific price at
      which it has been entered due to the constant change in the
      quotation and the application of the Spread.

     ❖ Limit. Passive order that is executed at a specific price. Entry at
      that specific price is guaranteed but execution is not guaranteed.
        That is, the price may never visit that level and therefore we
        would not enter the market. As long as they are not executed,
        they can be removed at any time.

      ❖ Stop. A passive order that is executed at a specific price. When
       the price reaches it, it becomes a market order and is therefore
       executed at the best available price (Best BID/ASK).

      ❖ Stop-Limit. Combines the features of Limit and Stop orders.
       Once a certain price level is reached (Stop orders function), an
       order is generated at a specific level (Limit orders function).
       Operationally, it works exactly the same as Limit orders.

       Based on the four types of orders we have just seen, the following
is the full spectrum of basic orders available depending on the intention
and what it is used for:

      ❖ Buy Market. Aggressive order at the current price. It is used to:

               Enter the market on buy.

               Close a sell position (either at a profit or loss).

      ❖ Buy Stop. Pending order above the current price. It is used to:

               Enter the market on buy.

               Close a sell position (by Stop Loss).

      ❖ Buy Limit. Pending order below the current price. It is used for:

               Enter the market on buy.

               Close a sell position (by Take Profit).

      ❖ Buy Stop Limit. Pending order below the price after reaching a
  level. It is used to:

          Enter the market to buy.

          Close a sell position (by Take Profit).

❖ Sell Market. Aggressive order at the current price. It is used to:

          Enter the market on sell.

          Close a buy position (either in profit or loss).

❖ Sell Stop. Pending order below the current price. It is used to:

          Enter the market on sell.

          Close a buy position (by Stop Loss).

❖ Sell Limit. Pending order above the current price. It is used to:

          Enter the market on sell.

          Close a buy position (by Take Profit).

❖ Sell Stop Limit. Pending order above the price after reaching a
 level. It is used to:

          Enter the market to sell.

          Close a buy position (by Take Profit).




      4.3.1 ADVANCED FEATURES
     There are certain advanced instructions that can be applied,
depending on the broker, to orders to enter and exit the market:

      One-Cancels-Other (OCO). Entering two orders to the market
with one of them being cancelled when the other is executed.

      Order-Sends-Order (OSO). Instruction to execute secondary
orders when the initial one is executed.

      Market-To-Limit (MTL). Execution of a market order that
includes an instruction to place a limit order at the same price with the
remainder of the position if it is not fully executed.

      Market-If-Touched (MIT). Execution of a market order that
includes an instruction to place a limit order at the same price with the
remainder of the position if it is not fully executed.

       Limit-If-Touched (LIT). Conditional order to trade with a pending
order (Limit) when a specific level is reached. It is used to buy above the
current price and to sell below the current price.

      Good-Til-Cancelled (GTC). It includes a temporary execution
period which is usually the duration of the session. If at that point the
order has not been executed, it will be cancelled.

        Good-Til-Date (GTD). The order remains active until a specific
date.

      Immediate-Or-Cancel (IOC). Instruction to execute the order
immediately. If any portion of the order remains unfilled, that portion is
cancelled.

      Fill-Or-Kill (FOK). It does not allow partial execution. When the
price is reached, it either enters the market with full volume or is
cancelled.

        All-Or-None (AON). Similar to the FOK orders with the difference
that in case the price reaches it and it is not executed because it cannot
cover all its volume, it remains active until it obtains all the counterpart or
it is cancelled by the trader.

      At-The-Opening (ATO). Instruction to execute an order at the
opening of the session. If this is not possible, it is cancelled.

       At-The-Close (ATC). Instruction to execute an order at the close of
the session.
      4.4 TOOLS FOR VOLUME ANALYSIS



Thanks to certain tools that analyze the flow of orders we can see all the
interaction between buyers and sellers who participate in the market in
different ways.

      We will mainly distinguish them by the type of orders they deal
with as not all these tools are based on the same data:

      ❖ Analysis of pending orders: Order Book, also called Depth of
       Market (DOM).

      ❖ Analysis of executed orders: Time & Sales and Footprint.

      We will point out their most important characteristics in order to
provide the reader with a basic knowledge of the peculiarities of each one.




                    4.4.1 ORDER BOOK

      Identifies all pending orders for execution (liquidity) that are
located in the BID and ASK columns; as we already know, the BID
represents pending buy orders and the ASK represents pending sell
orders.




       As these types of software only have Level II of depth, most
markets can only show ten levels of liquidity above and below the current
price. This is relevant because beyond those ten levels there will still be
liquidity located, but it is only visible to those who have Level III of depth
(mainly liquidity providers).

      The analysis of the order book presents some problems. One of
them is that the visible liquidity is never the liquidity that is actually
located in those levels. The liquidity that can be seen in the order book
comes only from limit orders. By their very nature, market orders cannot
be seen anywhere, since they are born from an initiative and are executed
instantaneously. On the other hand, Stop orders, as they become a market
order when their price is reached, are not displayed in the Order Book
either.

      In addition to this, as we have seen in the advanced features of
some orders, there are certain instructions that are not displayed in the
Order Book either, so that in reality we would be analyzing a not very
high percentage of the total orders pending execution.

       Another major problem with the analysis of the order book or any
other tool based on this liquidity data is that these orders that are pending
execution can be removed by whoever placed them there at any time
before they are executed. Due to this peculiarity different forms of
manipulation carried out by algorithms emerged:




SPOOFING
      This is the placement of huge amounts of contracts in the BID and
ASKS columns (limit orders) without the intention of actually executing
them. The aim is to give the impression of an "insurmountable barrier"
and cause the price to move to the opposite side. They are false orders
because when the price is about to reach its level, they are cancelled and
are not executed.

       It is an interesting concept that highlights the value of the ability of
limit orders with respect to price movement. As we have mentioned, limit
orders by themselves and by their very nature do not have the ability to
move the market, but using this form of manipulative activity we see how
the price can move influenced by them at certain times. Not directly based
on their execution, but indirectly based on their influence.

       Imagine that you normally see limit orders of around 50 contracts
per price level. What will the other participants think if you suddenly see
500 contracts? Well, most logically they will see that this is a too high
price to pay for the price to cross that level and most likely cause a lack of
interest to go against such orders. And of course, this will result in a move
in the opposite direction of the huge order. Manipulation by large traders
to drive the price in the direction they want.




ICEBERG ORDERS
       This is the splitting of a large limit order into smaller portions. The
motivation for this type of action has to do with wanting to hide the actual
size of the original order.

       Mainly used by institutional traders who want to execute a huge
number of contracts in a given price range and who use algorithms
programmed with this technology to be able to do so passively and
without turning the price against them. It is important to note that there is
only one source behind such an order, just one large trader, not a
collection of them.

      It is very visual to take the example of a real Iceberg. On the
surface what you see is a seemingly normal amount of contracts, but what
you don't know is that this order is simply a part of a much, much larger
one. And when this small part is filled by the market the large order
quickly replenishes it.
       This is the clearest example of what a takeover would look like.
There may be many aggressive buyers pushing the ASK and all those Buy
Markets are crossing the Sell Limits of an Iceberg order which do not
allow the price to move up. We will say that a takeover of these purchases
is taking place.




                           4.4.2 TAPE

      Thanks to Time & Sales we can see in real time all the crossing of
orders already executed. The analysis of the tape becomes very complex
due to the speed at which the current markets move (mainly futures
markets).
      Depending on the software we can access different types of
information. It usually includes at least the columns with the time of
execution, the price level and the number of contracts.

       It can certainly be useful for the identification of large volumes
executed in a single order, known as "big trade". More modern versions
also allow the grouping of orders executed in blocks, pointing to the same
trader as the origin of different transactions spaced in time.

       A positive point of the Tape with respect to the Order Book is that
the tape represents the past, the orders already executed and therefore is
not susceptible to manipulation.

      Operating solely by analyzing the tape is not within everyone's
reach since it requires enormous experience as well as a great capacity for
concentration due to the speed at which it moves.




                      4.4.3 FOOTPRINT

       When most people refer to Order Flow they are actually referring to
this section of the order flow, the use of Footprint. Order Flow is a general
term that, as the name suggests, is concerned with order flow.




       The Footprint charts the data provided by the tape (orders already
executed) and represents them in a much more visual way. It would be
like putting a magnifying glass inside the candlesticks and observing the
number of contracts executed at each price level..

      The advantage of analyzing the Footprint is that it allows us to
quantify in maximum detail the interaction between buyers and sellers.
Observing the balance and imbalance between participants as well as
being able to identify in which column more volume is being traded can
certainly be useful at certain times.

      There are different types of footprint charting based on:

      ❖ The nature of the data: it can be set up with time, range, volume
       and rotation candlesticks.

      ❖ The representation protocol: Profile, Delta, Imbalance,
       Histogram, Ladder or BID/ASK.

       It is a very configurable tool that generally includes multiple
functionalities although it basically analyzes the orders executed by price
levels with the objective of looking for imbalances, takeovers, initiatives,
unfinished auctions, clusters, big trades etc.

       Once you know in depth how the order crossing is executed, you
will come to the conclusion that its analysis is very subjective and that
trading based on this tool without taking into account anything else is not
advisable.




                           4.4.2 DELTA

       A more specific and popular tool in the world of Order Flow
analysis is the Delta. The delta is an indicator that simply measures the
difference between the volume traded on the BID and the volume traded
on the ASK in a given period of time. If the difference is positive the delta
will be positive and vice versa if it is negative. In addition, the difference
between deltas can also be visualized since the indicators will normally
show them with different sizes.

        There is a common misconception that all volume traded on the
ASK "are buys" and all volume crossed on the BID "are sells", although
in reality with that statement they mean that they are directional in origin;
that is, they have an intention to add pressure towards one of the sides. If
this were so, why do we sometimes see bearish moves with positive deltas
and bullish moves with negative deltas? Believe me it's not that simple. If
it were, we would have found the Holy Grail. Again it has to do with the
crossover mechanism.




       For the time being, let's keep in mind that it is visually observed on
a horizontal axis with value 0 and that depending on the column where the
transactions are executed, it will be displayed positively or negatively on
the axis. This representation would be for the example of the normal Delta
since there is another variant, the accumulated, where it is charted
continuously without taking into account the horizontal axis.

      The delta is updated at each executed order and therefore gives rise
to the possibility that, as with the price, wicks are represented at its
extremes. If we observe a delta with a wick in its lower part, what it
means is that at a certain moment of its development the difference in
favor of the BID was extraordinarily large, and that at a certain point it
has begun to negotiate much more actively in the ASK column,
generating that reversal that leaves its mark in the form of a wick.
      As it happens in general terms with the analysis of the footprint,
although its interpretation is not as basic as I have explained above, it can
provide us with certain usefulness at certain specific moments.
        4.5 THE ORDER FLOW PROBLEM



As a basis, we must be clear about a series of ideas that will help us to
understand the rest of the content:

      1. A purchase is matched to a sale and vice versa.

      2. An aggressive order is matched with a passive order.

      3. In the columns of the BID and the ASK only the aggressiveness
         is reflected.

       Considering the different types of orders, it is now necessary to
understand what mechanism is used to match orders between participants
and in which column this execution is reflected.
      ❖ Stop orders become Market orders when they are filled.

      ❖ Stop Limit orders become Limit orders when the price set by
       the Stop order is reached.

       When the trader executes a Buy Market order, the order processing
mechanism kicks in and goes to the Order Book to find the first Sell Limit
order located in the ASK column to match this buy.

       The same happens when a Sell Market order is executed. The
processing mechanism directs that order to the most immediate price level
of the BID column to find the counterpart in the Buy Limit orders that are
pending to be matched there.

       With limit orders the process is the same. A participant leaves his
order pending execution in one of the two columns and it will stay there
until an aggressive trader arrives who needs to match his order.
       This is essentially what happens over and over again at high speed.
Regardless of the type of order used to enter the market, the end result
will always be that an aggressive order will cross with a passive one:




       And the column on which those order crossovers will be displayed
will depend on the order that initiated it. Therefore:

      ❖ Buy Market crosses with Sell Limit and is displayed in the ASK
       column, since the order that initiated the transaction is the
       aggressive buy.

      ❖ Sell Market intersects with Buy Limit and is shown in the BID
       column since the initiation comes from the aggressive sell side.



      Now let's do a reasoning exercise using as an example a trader who
enters the market with a short position (sell). This trader has different
ways to exit this position:
      ❖ Through a manual exit, either in loss or in profit by executing a
       buy Market order (and it would appear in the ASK).

      ❖ By executing the stop loss (stop loss), whose order will be a buy
       stop (and would appear in the ASK).

      ❖ By executing the take profit, whose order is a buy limit (and
       would appear in the BID).



       Similarly, a trader who enters the market with a long position (buy)
can leave it through three options:
      ❖ Through a manual exit, either at a loss or at a profit by
       executing a sell market order (and would appear in the BID).

      ❖ By executing the stop loss, whose order will be a sell stop (and
       would appear in the BID).

      ❖ By executing the take profit, whose order will be a sell limit
       (and would appear in the ASK).



       The point of this example is that the same action, such as closing a
position, can be shown in different columns (BID and ASK) depending on
the type of order used for it.

      Understanding this information is of tremendous importance
because many analyses of order crossing are erroneous because they start
from wrong premises.

      The first conclusion should therefore be that not everything that
appears executed in the ASK column is buying with the intention of
adding buying pressure to the market and not everything that appears in
the BID column is selling with the intention of adding selling pressure.
Herein lies the problem when analyzing order flow in any of its variants.

       These programs based on the order crossing mechanism are set up
to always reflect aggressiveness, the problem is that it is not possible to
distinguish what intention is behind the executed orders.

      When we see a cross executed in the ASK it will always be a Buy
Market with Sell Limit order; while when we see a cross executed in the
BID it will be a Sell Market with Buy Limit order, but what we will not
know is the origin/intention behind such a cross order:




        The main source of error when dealing with order flow analysis
comes because there is the belief that everything executed in the ASK has
a buy initiative origin and everything executed in the BID has a sell
initiative origin, but as we have just seen, nothing could be further from
the truth. This type of software makes a reduction to the execution of
aggressive orders with passive, but they cannot know what the
origin/intention of those orders is.

      What would happen if there is a crossing of orders of a Stop Loss
of a Buy Market and a Take Profit of a Sell Limit? This type of crossover
will be reflected in the ASK, but is there really an intention to add buying
pressure to the market? Obviously not, as we see in this example both
traders would be out of the market and yet their transaction would be
reflected in the ASK. This is the problem with Order Flow: it remains a
highly subjective tool. Even more so when you do not know perfectly
how order crossing works..

       The same problem is encountered for the BID column. There could
be the possibility of a matching of orders from someone who has triggered
the stop loss of a buy position (Sell Market) with someone who wants to
take profit from a sell position (Buy Limit). This crossover would be
reflected in the BID but both are out, there is no new selling pressure.

      I will now present two different contexts to exemplify again the
Order Flow problem:




 4.5.1 PROBLEM #1 PRICE DIVERGENCE

       For example, if we analyze the chart of the footprint we see a
bullish development in which at the top there is an imbalance (green
bottom) in favor of the ASK with a downward turn immediately after; this
fact offers us different interpretations.
        Some will say that they are trapped buyers (assuming this
imbalance in the ASK as aggressive buying with directional intent); others
will say that they are executions of stop loss orders of long positions; still
others will say that they are profit taking of long positions; and finally
some others may say that it is a passive entry of sellers (takeover through
sell limit orders).

       All of them are probably right. And the truth is that most probably
there is a bit of all of them. Also, at that point most likely the delta is
negative, showing us a divergence.

       This is where the problem becomes apparent when analyzing Order
Flow. The truth is that in real time we cannot determine exactly what the
true origin of these executions is. In many cases, in order to justify a
proposed scenario, one of these particular reasons will be alluded to. For
example, someone who is looking for a bearish move or who is already
positioned short will see those large orders executed on the ASK and
assume them to be "trapped buyers", as that is the reason that would
justify their bearish approach.

     The only objective in this example is that, as it appears in the ASK
column, it is a cross between Buy Market and Sell Limit orders; but to
state categorically that it is any of the possible origins already described
does not seem to be a very solid approach.

      Hence the importance that, in the event of deciding to work with
Order Flow, the most logical thing to do would be to subordinate its
analysis to the context provided by another approach such as, in our case,
the Wyckoff methodology. The reason for this is that due to the
complexity and nature of order matching we are going to find this type of
imbalance in any part of the chart and this does not offer us an advantage.




 4.5.2 PROBLEM #2 DELTA DIVERGENCE

       What happens when the Delta is not in agreement with the price? In
a positive Delta its candlestick is expected to be bullish; and in a negative
Delta, bearish. Divergence would appear when we observe a negative
Delta on a bullish candlestick or a positive Delta on a bearish candlestick.
       If all that appears on the ASK were market buying with the
intention of adding upward pressure, it is impossible for a positive Delta
to result in a bearish candlestick.

      Continuing with the same example as above, we see that the bearish
candlestick that originates the turn has a very positive delta (+235).

       The reasoning behind this situation could be as follows: The
positive delta may be the result of many aggressive buys (Buy Market)
that have been blocked with passive sells (Sell Limit) and have not
allowed the price to rise. All these crossing orders appear in the ASK.
Subsequently, if there is little demand in the BID (few Buy Limits), a few
aggressive sales would cause the price to move downwards. And this is
one way in which a positive delta with a bearish candle would eventually
be observed.
       As you have probably concluded, delta divergences implicitly
identify a takeover so if they appear in the right place they usually
anticipate interesting turns. This does not mean by any means that all
divergences will establish turns since sometimes these will occur over an
area of little interest and without that intention of takeover behind, hence
the problem of its use arbitrarily.




     4.5.3 PRICE AND VOLUME TRADER

       In the end, our task as traders is to identify when imbalances
between supply and demand occur and these will eventually show up on
the price and volume chart.

       A trader who only takes into account the price and volume action
may enter the market with some delay and may not have certain
information available (the real interaction between the participants) but
his trading will be much calmer as he will not have to interpret those order
crosses.

      In the previous example of price divergence, the trader who simply
analyzes the price action and volume will only focus on the fact that an
anomaly has occurred in that action, a divergence effort result. That large
number of executed orders will most likely be accompanied by an
increase in volume and a narrow range already denoting some divergence.
In addition, a subsequent downward turn would confirm this anomaly.

      Beyond assessing whether there has been a jump of stops, profit
taking, entry of short positions or that buyers have been trapped, which as
we have already mentioned is probably a bit of all of the above, what is
relevant is the final action and the trader who does not observe the flow of
orders but knows how to interpret the chart will eventually reach the same
conclusion, albeit with less stress.




                    4.5.4 CONCLUSION

        In addition to everything discussed with respect to order matching,
it is the precise moment to also recall the different types of agents that
operate in the market and the intention behind their actions (hedging,
speculation and arbitrage). The orders executed by these participants are
also displayed on the BID and ASK, and as we have seen, not all of them
have directional intentions which are ultimately those seeking price
movement.

      This is no small matter as the only ones who will show up again to
defend their position in case they have aggressively entered the market
seeking a profit from the price move will be the speculative traders. We
may see the execution of a large order at a price level and it may come
from an institution with the objective of covering a position held in
another parallel market, or it may be the activation of an arbitrage
strategy, to name a few possibilities.

      We therefore add a new layer of opacity and subjectivity. We have
on the one hand that not all participants come to the market with a
speculative interest; and on the other hand that the matching of orders
cannot determine the origin of such trading.

       We come to the conclusion therefore that the use of Order Flow
independently could be totally meaningless since in no case can it offer us
what is the most important aspect to determine in the market: the context;
knowing exactly where we are going to look for trades and in which
direction. Trying to understand this is vital in order to be able to perform
solid analysis and scenario planning.
      PART 5. VOLUME PROFILE




The Volume Profile is a variant of the Market Profile®, a tool designed
by J. Peter Steidlmayer in 1985 for the Chicago Board of Trade
(CBOT®). Steidlmayer was a trader and executive member of this
important futures and options market for over 40 years. This new method
of auction representation was initially intended only for CBOT members
although it quickly spread outside. We can therefore intuit that his
approach to how the market moves does not appear to have been ill-
founded.

       Unlike the Order Flow analysis, the Volume Profile is totally
objective as it does not require any interpretation and therefore provides
us with very useful information for our analysis and scenario approaches.

        With the Volume Profile analysis we come back to all the concepts
initially presented in the Auction Market Theory. We do not focus on
determining the intent of a particular order crossing, but rather broaden
the picture to identify the most relevant trading zones.

      The Volume Profile is not an indicator. It is simply another way of
representing volume data. It identifies very clearly and precisely the
number of contracts traded at different price levels.
        5.1 AUCTION MARKET THEORY +
               VOLUME PROFILE



The Volume Profile uses the principles of auction theory to put it into
practice and to visualize the areas of interest on the chart. Interest is
simply measured by the activity that has been generated in a particular
zone; and this activity is identified by the volume traded.

       This tool will therefore help us to identify the zones of greater and
lesser interest and will help us to evaluate the price when interacting with
them in order to determine whether acceptance or rejection is taking
place.

       All these principles are based on the premise that the market has a
memory and tends to repeat behavior. It is therefore expected that in the
future certain areas will again behave in the same way as they did in the
past.

      One caution to keep in mind is that the market's memory is
primarily short term. This means that more recent trading zones are more
important than older ones. If the price initiates an imbalance the first zone
to be taken into account will be the most immediate previous balance
zone.
        The longer the price has been away from a certain acceptance area,
the less significant it will be. If we have no other reference, it will still be
useful to value it, but it is important to be aware that the most immediate
equilibrium zones will most likely be the ones that the market will look
for in the first instance since they are the ones that best represent the value
at the present moment.
    5.2 VOLUME PROFILE COMPOSITION



Volume profiles are visually observed on the chart as a horizontal
histogram where their values are distributed according to the trading at
each price level.

       Depending on the number of contracts traded at each price level,
the shape of the distribution will vary. The more trades, the longer the
length of the horizontal line; while a short horizontal line represents little
trading.

      As a reference we will take a normal or Gaussian Bell distribution
to understand the most important statistical concepts:




      ❖ The data are symmetrically distributed with respect to the
        central point where mean, median and mode coincide.

      ❖ It has three standard deviations on each side, which are equally
       spaced and measure the amount of variability or dispersion
       around an average. It is also a measure of volatility.

      ❖ The first standard deviation comprises 68.2% of the data and up
       to the second deviation it reaches 95.4%.




VALUE AREA (VA)




      This real example is in the form of a normal distribution where the
values are distributed up and down around the central point.

      The data are organized by a vertical axis on which the price is
located and a horizontal axis representing the volume variable.
      The value area is determined between the Value Area High (VAH)
and the Value Area Low (VAL), is part of the first standard deviation and
represents exactly 68.2% of the total volume traded in that profile. It is the
most traded area of the profile and is therefore considered the area of
acceptance.

      The volume traded outside the value area comprises the remaining
31.8%. This is the least traded area of the profile and is therefore
considered a rejection area.

      The high and low levels of the value area (VAH and VAL) will act
as support and resistance areas as some interaction is expected above
them.

       The breadth of the value area leaves clues about market conditions.
A wide Value Area suggests that there is a large participation of all
traders, everyone is buying and selling at the prices they want; while a
narrow Value Area is a sign of low activity.




EXTREMES
       This is the highest (High) and lowest (Low) price reached in that
profile. These price levels should always be viewed as key reference
points.

      Depending on the trading generated at these extremes we can
consider that they represent finished or unfinished auctions.

      Finished auction. It is visually observed with a decreasing
negotiation towards the end. It represents a lack of interest as the price
reaches price levels further away from the value zone, finally suggesting a
clear rejection of the market to trade in that zone. By its very nature it is a
Low Volume Node.

      Prices have reached a point where some traders have considered it
as an advantageous opportunity and have entered causing this rejection.
The lack of participation from the opposite side is represented by this
decrease in volume.




UNFINISHED AUCTION
      It appears as a High Volume Node on the end of the profile.
Implicitly it represents interest to negotiate in this zone and therefore
suggests a later visit of the price in case it has previously moved away
from it. In the future visit it will be necessary to evaluate the intention
behind it since it could develop with the objective of finishing the auction
and turning around, or with the objective of continuing trading and
continuing in that direction.
       This concept of finished or unfinished auction can be very useful
because if, for example, we are assessing the possibility of the price
leaving an equilibrium zone upwards, we will want to see that at the
bottom of that zone there is a finished auction that would suggest a lack of
interest in trading there. In case of observing a possible unfinished auction
it would be convenient to quarantine the scenario since it is most likely
that before starting the upward movement there will be a visit of the price
in that low part with the objective of testing the interest in that zone.




       When in doubt as to whether we are in a possible finished or
unfinished auction, it is advisable to treat it as finished. Unfinished
auctions should be very visual and should not be involved in much
subjectivity. Generally we are going to observe them as an abnormal cut
in the distribution of the profile and in many occasions it will coincide
with one of the two limits of Value Area.
       In Market Profile this concept is totally objective: an unfinished
auction (Poor High & Poor Low) appears at one end where at least two
TPOs are observed; in other words, a finished auction will be represented
with a single TPO at the price level (Single Print).




VOLUME POINT OF CONTROL (VPOC)
       This is the level of highest volume concentration in that profile. It
represents the price most accepted by both buyers and sellers (fairer) and
sets the level from which the value area is calculated.

      Since most of the volume comes from large institutions, this is
where these large traders have accumulated most of their positions. They
generally accumulate contracts in a range of prices but the VPOC
represents a benchmark as it identifies where the most interest is.
       As it is a level that will attract a lot of trading, it is generally
advisable to avoid trading in its vicinity. The broad consensus among
participants will cause fluctuations around this level. This behavior will
continue until new information appears that unbalances the participants'
perception.

       The VPOC allows us to establish who is in control of the market. If
the price is above it, we will determine that the buyers will be in control,
so it would make more sense to trade long; if it is below it, the sellers will
be in control, so trading short would be a better option.

     Keep in mind that the VPOC, by its very nature, will always be a
High Volume Node, but not all High Volume Nodes will be VPOCs.




VOLUME WEIGHTED AVERAGE PRICE (VWAP)
      If there is one level widely used by large institutions it is VWAP.
Huge transactions seek to execute at the price level where the VWAP is
found and that is why it has elevated its level of importance.

      The VWAP represents the average price of all contracts traded
during a particular time period. The formula for obtaining it is as follows:

      ❖ No. of contracts traded * price of the asset / Total contracts
       traded

       To understand it a little better, we can say that above the VWAP
there is the same volume traded as below it, i.e. it represents an important
equilibrium level. This equilibrium means that when the price reaches the
VWAP there is the same probability that the price will go up or down.
        It is displayed on a chart like a traditional moving average and its
position varies as trades are executed. Generally, depending on the trading
style, the VWAP of the session, the weekly or the monthly is used.

       The VWAP is used by institutional traders primarily as an average
to determine the value of the asset at that point in time so they consider
that they have bought low if the price is below and high if it is above.

       Institutions have taken the VWAP as a reference measure with
which to judge the quality of their executions, hence its relevance and the
fact that we treat it as an important trading level.




      When they receive an order, they do not execute all the contracts
they need at one time, but will try to do so gradually, knowing that their
work will be judged on the basis of this reference level.

      Since it represents an important equilibrium level or fair price, it is
a good measure of whether we are buying too high or selling too low. We
can tell this by adding one or two standard deviations to the mean. Just
because the price is at some standard deviation does not mean that it
cannot continue to move in that direction, we could simply use it as one
more footprint to add to our analysis.
       But be very careful because everything is subject to the valuation of
the market at that moment. In a market in balance a price below the
VWAP will be considered cheap and a price above it expensive; but just
as the market becomes unbalanced to one side or the other the VWAP no
longer represents efficiency as now the perception of value has changed.

       Depending on the time frame we can make use of different levels of
VWAP. The most commonly used are the session VWAP for intraday
traders and the weekly and monthly VWAP for medium and long term
traders.




HIGH VOLUME NODES (HVN)
       High volume nodes. These are zones that represent balance and
high level of interest by all market participants as both buyers and sellers
have been comfortable trading there. It is observed as peaks in the volume
profile.




      Although we have used a composite profile for this example, the
fundamentals are equally valid and applicable to all profiles.

       Past balance zones act as magnets attracting the price and keeping it
there. As in the past there was some consensus between buyers and
sellers, in the future exactly the same is expected to happen. That is why
they are very interesting areas for target setting.

       Different High Volume Nodes can be identified within the same
profile.




LOW VOLUME NODES (LVN)
       Low Volume Nodes. These are areas that represent
imbalance/rejection. Neither buyers nor sellers have been comfortable
trading and therefore are considered in some way "unfair" prices. They
are observed as valleys in the volume profile.

       As in the past there was no consensus, it is expected that in the
future there will be no consensus either and cause some rejection, so they
are interesting areas of support and resistance where to look for potential
entries.

       It is important to understand that rejection can be represented by the
price in two ways:
V-TURN
      The perception of the value has not changed with respect to the
previous equilibrium zone and there is a rejection to trade at these levels.
The market turns completely around to re-enter the previous zone in
which buyers and sellers feel comfortable trading.

      What triggers this price reaction is firstly the placement of passive
orders waiting above that area to block the move, coupled with a
subsequent aggression that confirms the V-turn and return to the previous
value area.

      Visually it may be observed in the price as prominent wicks at the
ends of the candlesticks which will suggest such rejection.




RAPID MOVEMENT
      Participants' perception of value has changed and is represented in
the price by a violent movement. The market, based on the new
information, rejects trading at these LVN levels and moves quickly
through them.

       Technically, what causes this rapid movement is, on the one hand,
the execution of stop loss orders by those who are positioned on the
opposite side; and on the other hand, the activation of momentum
strategies that activation of momentum strategies that enter aggressively
with market orders.

      Visually, it will be observed on the chart with wide range
candlesticks generally accompanied with high volume.

      As with HVNs, more than one Low Volume Node can be displayed
within the same profile.
                 5.3 TYPES OF PROFILES



The volume profile is a tool that can be adapted according to the
operator's needs.

       The main difference when using one type of profile or another will
be determined by the trader's timeframe and the context he needs to cover
in his analysis.

      Basically we can differentiate three types of profiles:




FIXED RANGE
      This type is very versatile. Its peculiarity is that it allows us to
launch profiles manually on any particular price action.

      It is especially useful for identifying trading zones in two types of
contexts: trend movements and ranges.
       If we see a bearish movement we can launch a profile of the whole
momentum to identify the interesting zones over which the price is likely
to make some kind of bullish pullback. It is in those trading zones where
we want to be prepared to evaluate the possibility of entering in favor of
the trend. In the example we see how the price makes a test to the VPOC
of the bearish momentum and from there it generates a turn that causes
the development of a new bearish movement.

       If what we have is a context of lateralization, a structure of those
we work under the Wyckoff methodology approach, the profile will come
in handy to identify mainly where is the VPOC that determines the market
control and the value zone with its extremes (VAH and VAL). These will
be very interesting to take into account in order to look for the test after
the breakout of the structure, as in the following example.
      Unlike the other types of profiles, the fixed range is not updated
and only analyzes the volume traded in the area to be determined.

       Regardless of whether you are going to work with structures or not
under the Wyckoff methodology approach, it is very useful to pull profiles
that encompass several sessions in case we see an overlap between their
value areas. If we see more than one session generating value over a
certain price range, it is best to launch a profile that includes all the price
action, since the operating levels that such a profile can provide us with
will have by their very nature a greater relevance.




SESSION
       This is the profile of the day. It is especially useful for intraday
trading where the most important trading zones of the session are taken
into account. It ranges from the beginning to the end of the session and is
updated as the day progresses.
      Shorter-term traders use both the levels of the session and those of
previous sessions to make their scenarios.

       If we are observing a bullish movement and a subsequent
lateralization of the price, it would be interesting to look for the
incorporation in favor of the trend movement on some operative level. As
we know, the most important level of the whole profile is the VPOC so
we must take it into account to wait for our entry trigger on it.




      Continuing with this same example, another interesting area on
which to look for a test after a breakout could be an operating area of
previous sessions. If we are above the value area of the previous session,
the first operating level on which to expect a test to look for the bullish
continuation will be the Value Area High of the profile of the previous
session.




COMPOSITE
      Originally the profiles were displayed only by sessions and this
idea of grouping them was introduced by Donald L. Jones in his book
"Value-Based Power Trading" in what he called "The Overlay Demand
Curve". The objective was to try to eliminate the noise of the shorter term
and thus get a better understanding of the market condition, of the context.

      This type of profile can be set up in two ways:

      ❖ Fixed. Within the fixed mode we have the possibility to select
       the range of dates we want to include in the profile analysis. You
       may want to know the profile for the past week, the past month or
       the current year, this mode is designed for this particular
       requirement.

      ❖ Variable. The variable mode has the important peculiarity that it
       shows the traded volume of all price levels that are currently on
       the chart. It is important to keep this in mind because if the chart
       is moved, the profile will change.

       The best use of this type of profile, regardless of the time frame in
which we are trading, is to analyze the overall context and identify the
trading zones (mainly the high and low volume nodes) that we have both
above and below the current price.
      These zones will serve to indicate the bias of the market in a more
macro context as well as for the establishment of possible zones where to
look for entries and exits.

      If for example we are working on a structure, it is very interesting
to analyze the profile of the Composite to identify the longest term High
Volume Nodes on which to establish targets for profit taking.

       Another use could be to identify in the macro context a large Low
Volume Node and to encourage the development of a shock on it. We
could be working a potential cumulative structure. If when analyzing the
context we identify an LVN relatively close to the structure, it would be
interesting to take into account the possibility of the Spring that generates
the imbalance of the structure.
   5.4 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN VERTICAL
         AND HORIZONTAL VOLUME



Many who look with some suspicion at the Volume Profile allude that it is
not necessary to incorporate this type of tool in order to be able to make
solid analyses and approaches based on volume data.

      This is absolutely true; it is obvious that there is absolutely nothing
necessary. The problem is that they fail to understand what kind of
information they can acquire through their evaluation.

       The first thing that should be conveyed is that the Volume Profile
was not developed as a substitute for the classic volume. They provide
different information and are therefore completely complementary.

        To really understand what information is provided by volume data,
it is necessary to examine it from two points of view:

      ❖ Volume in time: This is the classic volume that is observed
       vertically on the chart. It has to do with the number of contracts
       exchanged within a certain period of time. It tells us when the
       major traders are active.

      ❖ Volume in price: This is the Volume Profile and is observed in
        the form of horizontal bars. It indicates the number of contracts
        traded within a certain price level. It tells us where the activity of
        the major traders has taken place.

      As we can see, both provide us with different information about the
same action (professional activity), volume in time has to do with when,
while volume in price has to do with where.

       With the vertical volume we can know that during the development
of a particular candle a specific number of contracts have been traded, but
how has the trading been distributed through the different price levels?
This is the information that horizontal volume gives us and that classical
volume cannot. It is quite another matter if you need to know this
information for your trading.
    5.5 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN VOLUME
      PROFILE AND MARKET PROFILE



The main difference between the two tools is that the Market Profile is
designed based on time, while the Volume Profile is designed based on
volume.
       The Market Profile represents the price data on the chart in letter
format, where each letter (called TPO or Time Price Opportunity) is
identified with 30 minutes of trading. So, the letter A will correspond to
the first 30 minutes after the opening of the session, the letter B to the
next 30 minutes and so on, adding letters and minutes until the end of the
day.

       Traders who base their trades on Market Profile analyze the
opening of the day with respect to the value area of the previous day and
the evolution of the Initial Balance (range that covers the first hour of
trading) to determine the type of day that is likely to happen and propose
scenarios based on this. It should be noted here that some traders
determine the Initial Balance based on the first half hour only.

      Although Volume Profile traders usually do not take the Initial
Balance into account, the message it conveys can be very interesting
mainly because:

      ❖ The narrower its range, the greater the probability of a trending
       day; and the wider the range, the greater the probability of a
       sideways day.

       An interesting use that MP offers us is the objective determination
of acceptance or rejection on a price level. While in Volume Profile this
can be shrouded in subjectivity, Market Profile analysis eliminates this
discretionality: rejection is visualized by 1 TPO; while 2 or more TPOs
begin to represent acceptance.

       The development of the distribution of the profiles of both tools
will tend to look quite similar if both tools will tend to look quite similar
although they will not be exactly the same. This is obvious since they do
not use the same data for their representation. An accumulation of TPOs
will indicate that the price has spent a long time at that level, while an
accumulation of volume will tell us that a large number of contracts have
been exchanged at that level.

       In Volume Profile, as it is designed according to volume, the most
traded level will not necessarily be the level where the most time has been
spent; since the price may reach a level that in a few seconds accumulates
a large number of orders and turns around (as in the example). The time
that the price will have spent at that level is little but the volume traded is
a lot so the Volume Profile POC will be at that level while the Market
Profile POC will not.




      Due to the current ecosystem of financial markets where the
importance of volume is highlighted, it would seem more interesting to
use the combination of price + volume (Volume Profile) rather than price
+ time (Market Profile).
       This is not to say that the time variable is unimportant or less
important, nothing could be further from the truth. Obviously, time is a
key element in establishing where participants decide the value of a
particular market is at a particular moment in time. The consumption of
time in a given area is an unquestionable sign of acceptance and therefore
value building.
                   5.6 PROFILES SHAPES



As is obvious, the market will not always develop D-shaped profile
distributions as this would mean that we are in an infinite equilibrium
context.

       There is a lot of theory written in Market Profile about the different
types of days based on the shape of the profile (normal day, normal
variation, trend day, double-distribution trend day, non-trend day, neutral
day, neutral day extreme).

       The truth is that identifying the shape of such profiles to determine
what kind of day we have had may be valid for the human mind from the
point of view that we always want to control everything and need to look
for a logic to every behavior; but from a trading point of view it does not
seem to be a very useful approach since the categorization is done by an a
posteriori analysis.

      Furthermore, over time evidence has been provided that it is not
possible to consistently predict what type of day we are most likely to
have based solely on the previous day's categorization. Steidlmayer
himself eventually acknowledged this. Unsurprisingly, it is impossible to
know what shape the current session profile will have until the session has
ended.

       It is exactly the same with the labeling of events, phases and
structures under the Wyckoff methodology approach. It may be useful for
the more novices to feed the subconscious with the various ways in which
the market can represent accumulations and distributions; but it is totally
useless from an trading point of view as the confirmation of all this is
done after the fact.

       It would therefore seem more sensible, for the purpose of setting up
trading scenarios, to focus on identifying the creation of a value zone
(range) and to evaluate the price continuously as it interacts at its
extremes in order to identify acceptance or rejection. The analytical tools
offered by the Wyckoff methodology help us in determining who is more
likely to be in control during the development of the range (buyers or
sellers) and therefore in which direction the path of least resistance lies.

      During the development of the moves, profiles will be generated
and two very common ways in which trend and sideways behavior is
graphically observed are the b and P patterns.

       These patterns represent the first three phases of market activity
that Steidlmayer presented in his first studies and that by Wyckoff
methodology we identify as Phases A and B of the development of
structures.
       These patterns will alert us to the halt of the previous trend
movement as well as the new lateralization context. These two types of
profiles show the same behavior but in both directions. Firstly, in the low
price zone the price moves with a certain fluidity developing the trend
movement until it meets traders willing to trade in the opposite direction.
At that point an equilibrium range begins to develop, a zone of high
participation that generates the profile bell.

      As long as the price is during the trend movement, we should only
be looking to trade in favor of that direction. We can rely on the
developing VPOC and the rest of the operating levels.




                5.6.1 P-SHAPE PROFILE

       Characteristic of bullish movements and representative of future
distributive and reaccumulation schemes.

      This type of profile suggests strength on the part of buyers who
have had the ability to push the price up with relative ease until it reaches
a point where sellers begin to appear.
        It is made up of two parts: a first one where the upward imbalance
is observed and a second one where the market starts a rotation process
(range). This is important to keep in mind because if such a process
occurs in reverse (first a rotation and then a downtrend) visually we will
still see a P-type profile with the big difference that it will have difficult
trading validity.

       All the concepts and tools that are being proposed have an
operative sense; and in the case that concerns us with the P and b patterns
they are only interesting if the last price action is the creation of new
value (range) since it will be from there where the next profitable
imbalance will be generated. That is, if we are at the end of the bearish
movement at the point of having already identified the P pattern in mirror
(with the imbalance to the right) completely, from the point of view of
operating that imbalance we may be too late and the most likely thing is
that the price will generate a new equilibrium zone as the most immediate
action. On the contrary, if we have a theoretical P pattern (with the
imbalance to the left) we will be able to take advantage of the subsequent
trend movement (which may be upward or downward).
       Besides looking at it in isolation (session profiles), it is interesting
to know that a longer-term uptrend will be composed of several of these
profiles in its internal development. In this case they will simply be
reaccumulative patterns that give rise to the continuous upward
development.

       In case this type of profile appears after a prolonged downtrend, it
could alert us to the imminent end of the downtrend at least temporarily.
Here it is important again to note that it refers to see the theoretical P
pattern; because if what we see is a mirror P pattern what we would
actually have would be a distribution and therefore the downtrend would
denote strength.




                5.6.2 b-SHAPE PROFILE

      Characteristic of bearish movements and representative of future
cumulative and redistribution schemes.

       Individually, this type of profile signals an imbalance in favor of
sellers. Sellers are in control and have pushed the price strongly
downwards until finally some participants appear buying and a new
rotation process is generated.




      Within the context of a longer-term downtrend they will appear
with redistributive character being excellent areas where to look for
incorporation in the trend.

        As with the P pattern, the theoretical type b is formed by a bearish
imbalance as the first part and a value creation as the second. A rotation
first and a subsequent bullish imbalance would also appear visually with a
b-shaped profile but operationally we may not be able to take advantage
of that first imbalance. On the other hand it would also not have the same
implications when analyzing the health of the preceding uptrend, where
what we are looking for is upside rejection and value generation below.
      In case of observing a b-shaped profile after a prolonged bullish
movement, it could signal the end of such movement and sometimes the
beginning of a new one towards the bearish side.
          5.7 USES OF VOLUME PROFILE



This tool offers us totally objective information that fits perfectly within
the context provided by the principles of the Wyckoff methodology.

      Some of the most important uses we can make are listed below.




       5.7.1 IDENTIFYING STRUCTURES

       There will be occasions where the delineation of the ends of
structures will not be very visual, possibly because the price action has
generated unclean movements. In this context it can be very useful to use
the Volume Profile to pinpoint the high and low zones of the value area
(VAH and VAL) assuming this area as the range that is generating the
cause of the subsequent movement.

       By their very nature, the upper and lower limits of the structures we
work with according to the Wyckoff methodology will always be low
trading zones (LVN). The price turns that generate the creation of these
supports and resistances are areas where the price has not wanted to trade
and are therefore identified as rejection. That rejection we already know is
visualized within the volume profile as an LVN.

       In addition, sometimes the natural ends of the structures (Creek and
Ice) will coincide with the ends of the value area (VAH and VAL). By
pulling a profile of that structure we will be able to observe how all price
action contained within the range will be part of the value area.




       As can be seen in the chart below, the stop of the bullish movement
does not show very clear price action where the stop events are genuinely
visualized. If we are in the final part of the development of such a
structure we could pull a profile of the whole structure to identify key
levels by Volume Profile. In this case we see how after the final shock
from above the price quickly crosses the entire value zone including the
VPOC and VWAP. At this point we should be favoring the distribution
and therefore the first scenario in short would be to wait for the test after
breakout (LPSY) on any of the operating levels. The first of these levels
to take into account would be the Value Area Low as it is the first that the
market would find. We see how it made this test to continue the bearish
development from there. The next and last level to look for the potential
LPSY would be the VPOC of the profile.
       In this other example something similar happens. Stopping events
may not be the most visual and then there is the added difficulty of
framing that bullish movement that leaves the value zone and then re-
enters. The objective is that, if we find ourselves seeing an imbalance
after the development of a structure already with a certain maturity, we
can launch a profile to identify the operating levels on which to expect the
price to develop the test looking for the continuation of the movement.
Again we see how after the breakout movement, the test is done just
above the end of the value area of the profile, in this case above the Value
Area High; it is the perfect area for the search of the long entry trigger.




       The scope of the profile should include all the price action from
the time the rotation starts until just before the imbalance occurs. There
are traders who may also include the breakout action within the profile,
which is not to say that this is incorrect. Just keep in mind that from the
trading point of view what we are looking for is that this test after
breakout is going to look for some trading level of the previous
accumulation/distribution and this would leave out both the imbalance
and the subsequent movement to the test.

      As we can see, most of the structures that develop in real time
markets are not as genuine as shown in the ideal book examples, plus they
are all different from each other. But this does not mean that they are not
tradable. This is where the levels provided by the Volume Profile tool
come into play.




     5.7.2 DETERMINING MARKET BIAS



BY ANALYZING THE TRADING ZONES
       We will always favor trading in the direction of the last high
trading node generated. And a scenario against this direction would only
arise when the price has broken the zone that supported the last move.

       If the price is above a high volume node (HVN) we will determine
that the control is in the hands of the buyers and we will only raise a short
scenario when the price crosses this zone from below, which will suggest
that the control has changed in favor of the sellers.

       The logic is that at these nodes the price returns to a state of
equilibrium and we will not be able to determine in which direction it will
move subsequently. Only after confirming the effective breakout of this
zone would we be in a position to propose a scenario with some
robustness.
       The above chart shows this concept very clearly. If we are in the
final part of the bullish movement, above the last HVN, we should wait
for a breakout before looking for a short trade. The profile has been drawn
covering only the bullish movement (from 1 to 2), since what we are
interested in knowing is where is the volume node that is supporting this
movement. When this is crossed downwards we can suggest that the
control has shifted to be in favor of the bearish and now we are in a
position to propose a short scenario for example to the test of this HVN.




     In this other example we have the same dynamics but in reverse.
We locate the HVN of the bearish movement in force and the idea is to
continue favoring shorts until it is broken. Note, not until this HVN is
broken, but the last one to be generated. That is, if the trend continues
downward, we must continue to update the profile to identify where the
last HVN is and only at the time of its break to the upside could long entry
be considered.

       It should be noted that not necessarily the HVN that determines the
control of the movement must also be the VPOC of the profile. We will
simply take into account the last one to develop, regardless of whether it
is the VPOC or not.




BY ANALYZING THE OPERATING LEVELS
       As a general rule, the most advisable is to trade with as many
operating levels in favor as possible. That is to say, if I am considering a
long trading idea, I will want to have all the trading levels below the price
and vice versa if I am considering a short idea. This context will suggest
that the market is unbalanced in that direction and that it is therefore the
path of least resistance.

       If in addition to this we have the possibility to evaluate the
relationship between VPOC, VWAP and price, it will be one more
footprint that will add strength to the analysis.

       A relatively close VWAP and VPOC is a footprint that confirms the
overall balance of the market. Possibly, price is in an extremely tight
range and the only trading approach here would be to look for reversal at
the extremes.
       That is exactly what is happening on this day. The dark dotted line
is the VPOC of the developing session and the orange dynamic line
corresponds to the VWAP. Until a final imbalance to the downside occurs
both levels remain relatively close and this generates constant fluctuations
between them, causing a range day.

       To determine an imbalance in favor of buyers we want to see the
price above both the VWAP and the VPOC; while for control in favor of
sellers we want to see the price below both levels.




      In this chart we see an example of clear bearish control where at all
times of the session the price is below both the VWAP and the VPOC,
acting as resistance to originate new bearish movements.

       The temporality to use in these operative levels, as everything, will
depend on the trader. For an intraday trader the most advisable will be to
use the levels of the previous session and of the current session. Longer
term traders may find it more useful to use such levels on a weekly basis
(weekly VPOC and weekly VWAP). Particularly being a structure trader,
I find it useful to take into account the weekly VWAP in conjunction with
the VPOC of the structure, thus eliminating the seasonality. It is a matter
of taste and this configuration should be adapted to the trading style of
each trader.




       In this chart where we are analyzing a structure we could pull a
profile of it and add the weekly VWAP (green dynamic line). It is a very
good example to highlight the importance of the context above any other
element.

       If we see a potential Spring that manages to position itself above
the VWAP we would be ready to look for a long entry. But if we look
closely, the VPOC of the profile we would still be against the VWAP that
is marked. We are suggesting the possibility of trading in favor of the
more operating levels the better, what do we do then? Context should
prevail in cases like this. We know that VPOC is a very important
balancing level, but we also know that the market will initiate an
imbalance sooner or later; and that shakeout from below suggests to us the
potential initiation of such an imbalance from the upside. In such a
context we should assign greater relevance to the development of the
structure above the VPOC.

       We would have reasoned very differently if the price after the
potential Spring had not even had the ability to move above the VWAP.
That lack of strength would have suggested to us some bearish control and
even an entry in the opposite direction could have been priced in seeing
Spring's labeled move as a genuine bearish breakout event. Any action
must be confirmed or rejected with subsequent price action.

       That is just what we have in this example. In a potential Spring
situation the price attempts to re-enter the range but is unable to position
above the extreme of the structure, the profile VAL and the weekly
VWAP. This is a sign of significant weakness that would lead us to treat
such a pattern as distributive.
       When working with different levels it is also important to keep in
mind that we can use several timeframes in conjunction, for example, two
VWAPs in weekly and monthly timeframes. This configuration is really
interesting if we decide to analyze a longer term context.




      5.7.3 ANALYZING TREND HEALTH

       A very interesting footprint provided by the Volume Profile is the
continuous analysis of the profile of the sessions. When we are observing
a bullish movement, a symptom of the health of the movement would be
to observe that the value areas (and therefore the VPOCs) of the sessions
are generated higher and higher. This suggests that the value of the asset
is being accepted in the new trading areas, it is reaching and therefore the
trend is likely to continue. In this context of control by buyers, we should
be looking for a pullback to trading zones predisposed to go long.

       The same applies to downtrends. An unmistakable sign of its health
would be to see that the value areas that leave the sessions are observed
each time at lower levels, denoting acceptance of the price. In this
scenario of bearish control, the most advisable thing to do is to identify
areas of potential resistance to look for short positions.

       Something that would alert us to the health of this movement would
be to observe overlapping between several areas of value as well as to see
that some of them are moving against the direction of the trend, losing the
dynamics it had been carrying. We would already be observing a
consolidation of the price and it could alert us of a change of character.
By Wyckoff methodology we could surely already identify a lateralization
process and it would be interesting to start analyzing the traces of this
structure in order to try to determine in which direction the next
imbalance will occur.

       This potential change in the perception of value is very clearly
visualized with the P and b patterns. If the market is in the middle of a
bearish trend leaving the value zones lower and lower and then suddenly a
bP pattern appears, this could be the end of the bearish movement or at
least a temporary halt. The fact that the market has developed this P
pattern after the b pattern suggests a change in the perception of value. At
least temporarily it no longer wants to trade at lower prices and we could
even be facing the beginning of an uptrend.




       Rather than seeking to clearly observe the ideal pattern, what is
interesting is the evolution of the value generation, i.e. the rotation of the
Value Areas. In this example the participants have had enough capacity to
generate value above the previous one and this alone should alert us to the
health of the bearish movement and even put us on alert for a possible
accumulation.

      The same would be true in reverse. If we are looking for a bearish
market turn, a signal that would add strength to such analysis would be to
observe a Pb pattern.




        This example is a bit more complex and interesting to analyze. The
first thing that is striking is that the pattern does not occur in tandem, but
rather two sessions in between. On the other hand, we can see how profile
b does not generate value below the Value Area of the profile

      P. This is a real example; the market behaves erratically most of the
time so looking for the appearance of perfect patterns can be a waste of
time. It would seem more interesting to stay with the dynamics within
them; what they implicitly suggest to us.

       After the appearance of the P-type profile there is a change in
character and the market begins a rotation process. The following two
days the value areas are overlapped, showing the acceptance of these price
levels by the vast majority of participants. Finally, the creation of the type
b profile triggers the bearish imbalance. At that precise moment when the
price is below the value area of profile b and after seeing all that has been
analyzed previously, a short scenario could be proposed, seeking the
effect of this potential distributive structure.
       If we look closely at b, the imbalance does not occur at the
beginning of the session as theory suggests, but rather in the last part of
the session. The key is that this imbalance is rejected and re-enters the
value area. In essence this is the implication behind the pattern: it makes
no difference when the imbalance occurs as long as the price generates a
rejection and re-enters the value area. For trading purposes what would be
less interesting for us would be to observe the imbalance at the end of the
session and whose close is established outside the value area.

        Although the ideal in potential distributive schemes would be to
observe first the rejection to continue rising plus the generation of value
below the previous sessions, the appearance of this protocol in reverse
(first the generation of value below and then the rejection to trade at
higher prices) implicitly suggests the same reading of change in the
perception of value.

       In the end, all cumulative and distributive schemes implicitly carry
this change in the perception of value; and to a greater or lesser extent
these P and b turn patterns will always be visualized.

      ❖ A bearish turn with pattern Pb is nothing more than a
       distribution that will have a greater or lesser duration which has
       been confirmed with the generation of value in b and it is possible
       that lower prices will follow.

      ❖ A bullish turn with bP pattern tacitly is an accumulation whose
       change in the perception of value possibly gives rise to higher
       prices.
                5.7.4 VPOC MIGRATION

       The current level of the VPOC represents agreement by both parties
on the value of the asset, but

      What reading to do in the event of a VPOC migration?

       This issue has brought many traders upside down as the reading it
offers has two different points of view. On the one hand many advocate
that this is an unequivocal sign of the health of the movement and
therefore suggests continuity in the direction of the trend. Many others
advocate the position that a turn in the market is possibly originating.

      The only objective is that it represents a value zone where price has
been accepted due to the high trading it has generated. The question
would be to determine the meaning of this value migration, whether as a
continuation or as a reversal.

       Under the principle that every market action must be confirmed or
rejected by its subsequent reaction, the key lies in evaluating the
subsequent price action following the checkpoint migration. As a general
rule, if we do not see a continuation in the direction of the preceding
move without consuming too much time we should question the health of
that move.




TRADING WITH VPOC MIGRATIONS
      Since we cannot know in advance whether a VPOC migration will
make continuation or reversal sense, it is most useful to be prepared for
both scenarios. To this end, we will develop two simple protocols in order
to establish some general guidelines.

       This section is focused on intraday trading, although the underlying
idea is equally valid for application to any other time frame.




PROTOCOL TO FAVOR THE REVERSAL
      1. VPOC migration. If the preceding trend movement is healthy,
  after the migration of the VPOC we want to see a new momentum
  develop without consuming too much time.

      2. Non-continuity. If after the VPOC migration the price does not
  have the ability to continue to move in the direction of the preceding
  trend we would be in a position to at least begin to question the
  continuity of the move.

      3. Time consumption. This is a fundamental footprint. The general
  rule of thumb is that the longer the price goes without continuing in
  favor of the preceding trend movement after the VPOC migration, the
  more likely a market turn rather than a continuation is likely to occur.If
  we want to look for the turn we will mainly observe that it starts to
  sideways consume a relatively large amount of time relative to what it
  was doing previously during continuations.

      4. The change of character. If migration occurs, an excessive
  lateralization without the ability to continue in the direction it had and
  in addition now appears an impulsive movement in the opposite
  direction we will be in disposition to raise an operative idea in
  reversion.

     5. Operative idea. The first operative level that we will take into
  account to wait for the price and look for the entry trigger will be the
  end of the broken value zone. If it breaks below, we will wait at the
  VAL and if it breaks above, at the VAH. As a second level, the VPOC.




       In this example (Intraday reversal trade with pattern b) we have
pulled a manual profile to see how the volume was distributed at that
particular moment. We see that after starting the session the price falls and
migrates the VPOC (1), then begins to rotate on it showing the non-
continuity (2) and time consumption (3). Then comes the change of
character with the upward imbalance (4) to finally go to test the old
VPOC zone (5), where we could be looking for the long entry.

       We have to keep in mind that if we are trading with the profile of a
current session it will continue to develop as the day progresses so that
after the breakout, we may identify the level of the Value Area where we
will wait for the price and then change its location. Although it is true that
it would not be the ideal context, the same trading area could be
maintained since from a logical point of view this is still a node of low
volume and therefore an interesting area of potential rejection of the price.
In addition, what the price is going to test is the previous
accumulation/distribution zone, so leaving the profile of the range is
totally advisable.




      In this example we see what would be a VPOC migration with a
reversal direction (we know this after seeing the subsequent movement)
but which does not follow the proposed protocol. When they do it with
this urgency, with little preparation, it is practically impossible to operate.
This is the problem with these V-turns.

       The incorporation of this example is intended to point out that not
all migrations with reversal direction will follow the proposed protocol,
far from it. With this series of steps what we are trying to do is to
objectify the turn and that it is based on the Law of Cause and Effect,
since again this protocol does not cease to be cumulative/distributive
processes.

       In addition, it is a very interesting graph to deal with the concept of
acceptance and rejection. By definition, a VPOC migration suggests new
acceptance at those price levels. The objective fact at that precise moment
is that more contracts have been traded (more acceptance) and therefore
the migration has occurred. But what reading would it leave if it generates
a total reversal of the movement? Well, again, objectively, what we see is
that if the session finally closes away from those levels, such action
remains as a rejection even if that migration has occurred.

       The importance of the principle that every price action must be
confirmed or rejected by the subsequent action appears again. In this case
the first action has been the migration of the VPOC, but that change in
value has been rejected by the subsequent reaction, which has reversed the
entire movement.

      If we recall, a change in the perception of value occurs when the
variables Price, Time and Volume work in consonance. In this case we
have the Price discovery movement, the Volume generation but the Time
consumption that would confirm the Value fails.
PROTOCOL TO FAVOR THE CONTINUATION:
      For intraday continuation trading the action protocol is much
simpler:

      1. VPOC Migration. Generally when the market intends to
  continue in the direction of the preceding movement, after the
  migration of the VPOC the price will start the new momentum with
  some speed. The urgency to continue moving in that direction will
  cause relatively little time to be consumed before continuing in that
  direction.

     2. Trigger search. We are therefore ready to enter the market. It is
  simply a matter of waiting for our setup to appear before entering.
       In the example we see that on the third VPOC migration the price
instead of continuing upward reverses downward leaving that price action
on the left as distributive. Thereafter the subsequent migrations make
continuation sense as they are followed by bearish impulses with relative
alacrity.

      Although this type of trade has been presented on an intraday basis,
during the course of a session; it may appear on the chart at different
times and the underlying idea will remain the same. It may develop over
the course of a single session, form over more than one session, or even
develop as a longer-term structure. Regardless of its duration, the
underlying logic is exactly the same.
      5.7.5 CALIBRATION OF POSITION
               MANAGEMENT

      The levels to use will depend on the type of profile used based on
your trading style, but generally speaking the logic will be exactly the
same for all of them:

      ❖ Entry. Regardless of whether we are in a trend or range
       context, the identification of the operating levels, mainly the
       VWAP, VPOC and high and low zones of the value area (VAH
       and VAL) will be extremely useful for us to wait on them the
       development of our market entry trigger.

      ❖ Stop Loss. For the establishment of the stop loss we want to
       identify areas where there has been a previous rejection; and
       these are the areas of low trading or Low Volume Nodes. The
       price generated a turn on them and we expect that in the future
       they will behave in the same way; therefore it is an excellent area
       to place our stop protection. In addition to the LVN, the more
       operating levels we have in favor, the better.

      ❖ Take Profit. For the establishment of take profits we are going
       to look for zones of high previous negotiation. As we have
       already mentioned, high volume nodes (HVN) produce certain
       magnetism in the price and therefore are excellent areas for the
       location of targets.
  5.8 TRADING PRINCIPLES WITH VALUE
                AREAS



Regardless of the type of trader you decide to be and therefore the
temporality and structures to use, these principles are universal with
respect to the value areas of a given profile, be it that of a candlestick,
session, movement or structure.




     5.8.1 TRADING RANGE PRINCIPLE
      If the price is within a value area, as long as the market condition
does not change the market is likely to continue to generate value around
the center point so the price will most likely be rejected when the
extremes are reached. Buy low and sell high.

       In the following chart we see a real example of the principle of
range trading. It can be any asset or timeframe; what we do have to take
into account is a reference profile to work on. For an intraday approach it
is recommended to work on the profile of the previous session. For
longer-term approaches, weekly profiles or Composite-type profiles that
include more price action may be useful.
      What is interesting in this case is that the price is within the
previous day's value area, suggesting a balance in the market. With this
basic idea, and as long as the sentiment of the participants does not
change, any operative idea should be to wait for the reversal at the
extremes of its value area, as seen in the chart.

      The minimum target for this reversal at extremes is a test to the
control zone (VPOC), with the most ambitious target being a move that
completely traverses the value area and reaches the opposite extreme.

       As always, the trades that will give us the most confidence will be
those whose trigger is located in confluence on more than one operating
level. In the example of the reversal that occurs on the VAL we see that
the price also tests the weekly VWAP (green line) and a former control
zone (DevelopingVPOC).




          5.8.2 REVERSION PRINCIPLE
       If price attempts to enter a value area and succeeds, it will most
likely go to visit the opposite end of that value area. The market has
refused to trade at those price levels so it returns to the previous value
area. Adaptation of Market Profile's 80% rule.
       This chart shows the opening of the last session away from the
previous day's value area at the top, indicating an imbalance to the bullish
side and therefore initially suggesting a buying control. This control must
be confirmed by the acceptance of the imbalance and we see how at the
moment of truth, in a position of potential bullish continuation above the
Value Area High, the price fails, re-entering again to the previous value
area.

       This is a very instructive example to visualize the importance of
keeping in mind both buy and sell scenarios in order to be prepared and
react in time when the market tells us to do so. Initially in this case we
would be looking for such a bullish continuation above the upper end of
the value area; but seeing its inability and subsequent re-entry, the reading
now is that the bullish price discovery has not been accepted and therefore
the probability now is that the price will visit the opposite end of the value
area.

       After the initial re-entry, an inside test occurs above the VAH at the
confluence with the weekly VWAP (green line) to initiate from there the
bearish movement that runs through the entire value area. At this point the
price returns to a condition of total balance evidenced by this continuous
bounce between the extremes of the Value Area.




      5.8.3 CONTINUATION PRINCIPLE
       If the price tries to enter a value area and fails to do so by being
rejected at the VA end or elsewhere, it will most likely initiate an
imbalance in favor of that direction.

      This is the test trade after a breakout. Price leaves a value zone and
generates acceptance. This acceptance puts the direction in favor of the
previous breakout as the most probable direction.

       It should be noted that the price can come from outside that value
area or from inside. The operating logic would be exactly the same.

       In the following example we see on a real chart the development of
this operating principle of continuation in its variant in which the price
comes from outside the working profile.




       The opening occurs above the Value Area High of the profile, so
the first interpretation we must make is that there has been an imbalance
to the bullish side in which buyers have had enough capacity to move the
price away from its last value.

      With this basic reasoning in which the market seems to indicate that
the buyers are in control, the first scenario approach would be to wait for
some kind of test before continuing with the development in favor of the
imbalance, in this case to the upside.

       The price opens the session and develops some lateralization and
then goes to look for the VAH zone where it generates the bullish turn
that could offer us a buying opportunity.

      The most astute Wyckoff traders will be able to identify even a
cumulative pattern from the beginning of the session, acting as a potential
Spring of this structure. This is a very good example to visualize the
importance of the context: in trading zones of purchase we want to see
potential accumulations, as is the case here.




   5.8.4 FAILED REVERSION PRINCIPLE
       If the price tries to enter a value area and succeeds, but is strongly
rejected at the VPOC of that range, the reversal trade would be cancelled
until further price action is seen.

       If it manages to recover the end of the value area, the continuation
trade would be activated; while if it finally breaks the VPOC effectively,
the reversal scenario would continue to be active with the objective of
testing the opposite end of the value area.




      The session opens below the previous value area so the first
reasoning would be that the market is in imbalance and potential bearish
control that would need to be confirmed.

       At the first zone above which to wait for such confirmation of seller
control (Value Area Low), the price overrides the scenario and re-enters
the value area, triggering the reversal trade. As we will see below, any
trade should be managed upon reaching the first relevant trading level;
and in this case, a potential purchase on the VAL should necessarily be
managed on the VPOC of the previous session.

      After reaching this level, sellers appear, unbalancing the market
again and provoking the development of a strong bearish movement. This
aggressive reaction pushes the price out of the value area again, changing
the market sentiment again and triggering at that point the failed reversal
plus bearish continuation trade variant.

        Now it does develop a successful test above the Value Area Low to
initiate from there the bearish movement with possible targets at the
weekly VWAP and at a nakedVPOC below.




    5.8.5 SUMMARY TABLE OF THE
  OPERATING PRINCIPLE WITH VALUE
              AREAS
            PART 6. ORDER FLOW




Once we have a thorough understanding of the subjectivity involved in
order flow analysis we come to the moment of further reasoning to see if
it is really useful to use it.

       In general, the only time when it would be useful to look at the
chart and look inside the candlesticks to analyze the order flow would be
when the price reaches the trading zones where we are looking for the
imbalances we expect to enter the market (it is all subject to the context).

       Being aware that the matching of orders has different intentions
behind it, what we are looking for in these imbalances is the entry of large
traders with the intention of taking risk, speculating, opening positions in
favor of one direction or another. We will never know for sure if what we
are really observing are directional orders and that is why we must limit
the use of this tool only on key operating zones.
      As we have already seen, footprint analysis can be done in different
ways based on the representation protocol. I particularly find it more
visual to observe the graph using a configuration known as Volume
Ladder. This type of footprint allows to observe the number of contracts
executed in the different columns (BID x ASK) while making a
representation of the volume traded at each price level within the
candlestick in the form of a histogram.
               6.1 FOOTPRINT READING




The first thing to be clear about is that the reading of the order flow is
done diagonally and not horizontally. This is due to the very nature of the
market in which participants can trade in different ways.

      Buyers can participate either passively by leaving their demands on
the BID or actively by attacking the ASK. Sellers can enter either by
placing their bids at the ASK or by assaulting the BID with orders to
market.

       Participants therefore have two prices at which to trade: the BID
and the ASK. There is no single price at which all participants can trade at
the same time. If there were, it would make more sense to analyze the
footprint horizontally rather than diagonally.

      That is why to assess the existing strength or weakness among
market participants at a given price level we will always compare orders
executed diagonally upwards: one level of the BID with respect to a
higher level in the ASK column.
                       6.2 IMBALANCES



A large part of the key actions that we try to identify in order flow
analysis have to do with unbalances. This behavior is composed of high
trading (high number of contracts traded) in one of the columns and at the
same time low trading in the opposite column (diagonally).

      It should be noted that this unbalance should meet certain minimum
parameters to be determined as such. The fact that there is simply a higher
volume than in the opposite column is not enough, there needs to be a
disproportionate difference in volume. And this difference can be
parameterized by configuring the platform to show such unbalances when
there is a 200%, 300% or 400% disparity between the levels to be
compared. This means that 2, 3 or 4 times more volume has been traded
on a column than on the opposite column.

      Many traders also add a minimum number of contracts to calibrate
the imbalance. If you have a deep knowledge of the market you are
working in this filter will help you to refine the identification of such
imbalances even further.

      Using these rotations in percentages allows the analysis to better
adapt to market conditions and adds some confidence as they are
objective values.




       In this example chart we see imbalances in favor of the BID with a
difference of 400%; in other words, 4 times more contracts have been
traded in the BID than in the ASK in relation to the diagonal opposite
level.

      The analysis to detect possible imbalances is carried out by
propinquity nature in comparative terms for two reasons:

         1. Because it takes into account the level of the opposite column
            to determine that there really is an imbalance.

         2. Because it will depend on the volume traded on that particular
            candle. Had such an action occurred at another time (where
            generally higher volume was traded) it might not have been
            seen as such an imbalance.
                   6.3 TURNING PATTERN



Order flow analysis involves many concepts. In an attempt to simplify and
try to objectify its reading, and since we are only going to proceed to its
analysis in potential trading situations, we will be looking for the events
that suggest an effective market turn: potential takeover and initiative.




ABSORPTION
      This is a blockade through limit orders. There are large traders who
do not want the price to move further in that direction and initially enter
through passive orders to cause the movement to stop.

        What is interesting is to see that after this high trading the price has
little or no movement in that direction. Sometimes these processes will
take longer and large traders will be forced to take such action repeatedly
over a price range, visualizing possible takeover over more than one
footprint.
      When determining a potential absorption we initially want to see it
appear on relatively high volume. This will minimize the possibility that
we are at the wrong time in the market where no such action is actually
taking place.

       On the other hand, although the color of the candlestick is
indifferent, its closing price must be against the imbalance. To treat such
behavior as potential takeover buying we want to see the imbalances
remain above the closing price; and below the closing price for the
example of potential takeover selling. This is the greatest demonstration
of blocking and refusal to move further in that direction.

      As with any other market action, it is confirmed or rejected by the
subsequent reaction. If we observe high volume, a potential takeover and
the inability of the price to continue moving in that direction, the odds
increase that we are actually looking at a takeover.

      Although such takeovers may appear leaving wicks, this is not a
necessary characteristic as they can also appear on candlesticks that close
at the same end. The key here is to see that the price does not
subsequently continue in that direction.




INITIATIVE
      As we have already mentioned, the execution of passive orders
alone does not have the ability to move the price, aggressiveness is
needed.

       If the analysis is correct and we are in the right place, after seeing a
possible takeover, the appearance now of initiative will be the definitive
signal to confirm the market turn we were looking for.




      This initiative is represented as large trades executed with market
orders on the column in which we are looking to enter the market: If we
want to buy we will look to see aggression in the ASK column and if we
want to sell we will look for aggression in the BID.
        Again we quote the principle that every action must be confirmed
or rejected by the subsequent market reaction. If we see a possible
initiative which is followed by a subsequent and immediate price move in
that direction, we will be in a position to confirm that action.

       This initiative, this large volume executed will be very easy to
identify on the trace as the imbalance with respect to the rest of the levels
of that same period will be very evident. Some authors use this term to
refer to several imbalances together. While it is true that the more
imbalances we observe, the stronger the approach will be, the
configuration of the imbalance greatly influences its representation since
it is not the same to configure the software to show imbalances of 400%
than 150% where the latter will appear much more frequently.

       As with the takeover, we must take into account the volume traded
on that candlestick. In order to add confidence to the reading, we want to
see that the volume is relatively high.

       Unlike the takeover, in case of the potential initiative we want to
see that the closing price is in favor of the imbalance; that is, in case of a
buy initiative we want to see the imbalances in the lower part of the
candle; and in the upper part in case of a sell initiative. This trace suggests
to us that there is harmony between that action and the subsequent and
immediate price movement.

       In essence this candlestick that denotes initiative is the same as the
SOS/SOWbar that we work under Wyckoff methodology, and should
therefore comply with their common characteristics::

      ❖ Relatively high volume.

      ❖ Wide range.
      ❖ Close at the extreme.

        Sometimes such a market turn pattern may be observed in one or
two candlesticks (V-turn). At other times, after visualizing a possible
takeover, the market will need more time consumption before the
initiative appears. In the event that the market needs to consume that time
before the actual turn occurs, what we want to see to add strength to the
takeover idea is some sideways movement of the price where we can see
the inability of the market to continue in the direction it was going, this is
a very evident sign of the takeover action at times.

       Another interesting detail that would add strength to the reversal
pattern is if the market leaves a finished auction at the end. This would
signal to us the refusal of traders to continue trading in that direction and
such lack of interest would facilitate the turn in the opposite direction. If
we are not able to identify the finished auction through footprint analysis,
we can use the Volume Profile as we have already seen.




 6.3.1 BEARISH TURN PATTER: BUYING
ABSORPTION AND INITIATIVE SELLING

      If we are currently waiting for a bearish trigger to develop, we will
look to the left of the chart in order to identify any traces that suggest
possible aggressive takeovers.

      As we have already seen with order crossing, aggressive buying
crosses with limit selling and this interaction appears in the ASK column.
Therefore, what we want to see as a sign of possible takeovers are large
trades in the ASK column on or near the trading area.

       But not just any location of these large trades would not be enough,
the ideal would be to see them on the top of the candlesticks because in
case that really big traders want to enter with limited sales, these will be at
a high price level (buy low and sell high).

       This possible takeover alone is not enough to enter the market. We
need to see aggressiveness that suggests selling intent, and we identify
this with the appearance of large trades in the BID column. This BID trace
is objectively the execution of aggressive Sell Market orders and given
the context in which we find ourselves, we could interpret that the origin
and intentionality of such orders is to enter the market directionally by
adding selling pressure.

      The ideal location where we want these large trades to show up is
over the top of the footprint. If in addition to this we see a subsequent
downward price movement, we would be facing another footprint that
would suggest the aggressive entry of sellers, visually and by
methodology it would appear on the chart as a Sign of Weakness bar
(SOWbar).
       In this example we see how this pattern of potential takeover of
purchases plus sellers initiative appears during the development of two
contiguous candlesticks. It would be the exact theoretical representation
of what we are looking for: an approach to the trading zone with a move
that denotes lack of interest, a quasi weather action where ASK
imbalances occur on the high side of the candlestick, followed by a
candlestick with BID imbalance also on its high side that achieves some
downward displacement and closes at candlestick lows (SOWbar). We
also see a significant rotation in the Delta from +197 to -171, suggesting a
change of control in favor of sellers, confirmed by the subsequent bearish
reaction.




6.3.2 BULLISH TURN PATTERN: SELLING
 ABSORPTION AND INITIATIVE BUYING

       In a context of waiting for the development of the bullish trigger,
we will be looking for traces that suggest a takeover of sales. Conversely
to the above, this takeover should show up as strong activity in the BID
column. Takeover is a simple blockade where in this case the price is not
allowed to fall. All sell orders assaulting the BID are matched with buy
limit orders making it impossible to move the price down. This is a very
important footprint of professional accumulation.

      With respect to the location of these large trades we want to see
them at the bottom of the footprint as a true reflection of the blockade. If
we see those huge volumes at the top it would make little sense to think
about possible takeover selling.

      Subsequently what we want to see is buying initiative: aggression
to the ASK suggesting the intention to enter the market directionally
driving the price up. We want to see these imbalances remain below the
closing price of the candlestick, which will suggest that this aggression
has had some continuity to the upside.

       In essence a SOSbar is exactly that, aggression by large traders who
get a large price move. The difference is that through candlestick analysis
we see the final representation and not the order crossover that occurs
within it.




       Here is a genuine theoretical chart of a bullish reversal. If we look
at it, before the turn we can already see a potential takeover on the
candlestick that marks a -536 Delta. It is a very good example to highlight
the importance of the Delta. After that -536 is followed by a bullish
candlestick, this is a first indication that we are possibly facing a takeover
because if the executed there were really aggressive sales, the price would
have continued to fall. Instead, the price reacts by rising; but this bullish
candlestick does not have much commitment behind it since on the one
hand it does not leave any imbalance to support its movement, and on the
other hand the delta is not very significant in relation to what we have
seen previously. Most likely the market is not yet ready to go up.

       And that is when it develops the effective turn in a two candlestick
pattern. New takeovers can be seen in that great first bearish candle which
is accompanied by a delta of -312 to later appear a bullish initiative candle
with imbalances in the ASK, a relatively high volume and a delta of +607
evidencing now a clear rotation in favor of buyers.
            6.4 CONTINUATION PATTERN



The continuation patterns serve us mainly to confirm the directionality
originated in the previous turn in addition to allowing us to identify points
where to look for incorporation when a trend movement is underway.

       This pattern is composed of two actions: the creation of the control
and its subsequent test..




CONTROL
        This pattern is the clearest signal of interest in favor of a direction.
It is visualized on the track by imbalances. It is essentially the same as
initiative with the only difference being that it occurs once the movement
has been initiated.

       Although we could determine a control with a single imbalance, it
is advisable to wait for the appearance of at least two imbalances. The
logic is that the more imbalances the traders are able to generate, the
stronger the zone will be. Again, it must be taken into account that
depending on how demanding it is to parameterize the software, it will
show more or less imbalances. For this reason, it is not necessary to
confine oneself to theoretical definitions that are not totally objective. The
fact that a single imbalance occurs instead of two or three together does
not mean that this event cannot be treated as a control.

      This is because the control action is not only about imbalances;
other characteristics such as candlestick range, candlestick closing level
and volume traded must be met.

      We therefore identify a bullish control when we see imbalances in
the ASK column on a candle with good volume that manages to close in
the upper third of the total range. Preferably the further down the
candlestick range the imbalances are, the stronger the stock.

      Similarly, we identify a bearish control on imbalances (the higher
the range of the candlestick, the better) in the BID column on a bearish
candlestick with high volume that closes in the lower third of its range.

      If we have not had the possibility to enter the turning pattern after
seeing the takeover plus initiative, the creation of the controls will offer us
a new possibility to join as long as there is still a considerable distance
from the level where we will set the target.

        The participants generating the pattern have had the ability to
exceed in an exaggerated way the number of contracts traded aggressively
with respect to the traders in the opposite column. This action is very
relevant as this is not just a single, isolated imbalance, but they have
enough momentum to create three imbalances in a row at different price
levels.

       If after seeing a reversal pattern we observe such an occurrence on
the print it will give us greater confidence that we are positioned in favor
of the majority of the professional money.




TEST TO CONTROL
       This is a move that is going to test a previous area where aggressive
traders (controls) have potentially entered.

       Controls naturally identify a strong zone where it is assumed that
the traders who caused the previous imbalance will reappear again should
the market revisit the zone.

      That is the underlying logic behind that particular action. We are
going to favor the fact that those traders are going to defend their position
by not letting the price move against them, thus offering us a good
opportunity.

       So what we will be looking for is the development of a new
reversal pattern over the zone. A zone that will encompass the price levels
identified in the control. In this context, the takeover action may not be so
remarkable since the big effort has already been made previously. What
should be evident is a new show of initiative suggesting the aggressive
entry of such traders defending their position. This should be the
definitive signal to enter the market.

      Sometimes such a test will develop very quickly on the next
developing candle. This will probably be seen as a wick that denotes a
lack of interest to trade in that area leaving a full reversal of the
candlestick afterwards. At other times there will be a small extension in
that zone where the price will temporarily appear to break it but
eventually reverses leaving a rejection. And there will be the occasional
time when the test leaves it practically ticking. The key here is to keep an
open mind and be flexible with respect to the representation of such a test.

      A It should be noted that the lack of interest should be manifest in this
behavior as in any other known test action under price and volume analysis.
Clear evidence of this inactivity as we already know would be observable
through relatively low volume.




       In this example the price comes from generating a bullish turn and
is in the middle of the movement. The bullish control is created in this
bullish candlestick with a wide range, good volume and positive delta. We
identify the imbalance level that also coincides with the VPOC of the
candlestick and we extend it to the right as a potential long search trading
area. The price then pulls back above this level and generates a two
candlestick reversal with good delta rotation. It is interesting to note how
the bearish candlestick reaches this level with a decrease in volume
denoting rejection and how the bullish candlestick subsequently generates
a large volume leaving a new imbalance in the ASK. From there the price
continues its bullish development.
      In this other example we see how the bearish control is generated
on a candle with large displacement and high volume with a large
negative delta suggesting strong aggressive entry of sellers.

       If we look, the imbalance in the BID is generated along with other
levels that have had a high trading so we can assume that area as a High
Volume Node; and this will be the one that we will project in the future to
look for the bearish continuation on it.

      In this case the chart is 15 minutes so if we want to refine the entry
we could lower the time frame to 5 minutes to look for the bearish
reversal pattern: takeover of purchases and sellers' initiative. In case we
want to continue maintaining the time frame, we would wait for the
closing of the candle that tests this control to evaluate if sellers have
entered again and our entry trigger is activated.

       The key, as discussed above, ahead of two or more imbalances
being generated together to treat such action as the control is that even if it
is only one, it appears on a candle with a wide range, close near the
extreme and relatively high volume as these are the traces that suggest to
us the entry of large traders.
        For the continuation pattern, we could also treat as the control on
which to look for the test that initial imbalance that we identified in the
initiation of the reversal pattern. Most likely it meets all the characteristics
we are looking for so it would be the first area to project in which to look
for the entry.
                        6.5 FRACTALITY



Although basically the reading of this type of pattern is intraday oriented,
this logic can be extrapolated in the same way to higher time frames.

       In the turning pattern observable in the Order Flow fingerprint,
takeover and initiative is nothing more than a minuscule-scale
representation of what in another temporality would be a cumulative or
distributive scheme. The same turning pattern could be observed in a
slightly larger perspective (during the development of one or several
sessions) and would be visualized in the form of P and b, where the bell is
nothing more than a takeover process within it, with the initiative being
subsequently represented as the movement of the breakout of the value
zone.

       Assuming it on an even larger scale we would have the medium
and long term structures composed from several days to weeks. These
structures again represent exactly the same behavior, where the takeover
process would be the accumulation/distribution range, and the initiative
would be the trend movement albeit on a larger scale.

      The only difference is the time consumption needed by the market
to complete such a takeover process. In the following example we see
how in the chart on the left it develops in a three candlestick pattern; in
the central one it does it during the development of a session; and in the
chart on the right it needs to consume several days to carry out the process
leaving a clearer structure.




      The same is true of continuation patterns. In essence a control will
be part of an impulsive move while a test to that control will be part of a
corrective move. This is the natural dynamic of trend movements:
impulses and reversals.

       Looking at it on a higher scale, such a control can be identified in
the VPOC if we launch a profile over the entire impulsive leg. This VPOC
would represent the control zone of the whole movement. That is why
these are levels to be taken into account on which to look for the end of a
possible retracement and the beginning of a new impulse.

      And on a longer term scale, where we try to analyze the overall
context, we assign the control function on the high volume nodes (HVN),
which represent accumulation/distribution structures over other time
frames.

       In the following chart we see an example of this concept of
fractality with controls. We launch a profile of the last impulse and
identify the VPOC of that leg. This VPOC can be considered as the sellers
control zone so a good strategy would be to try to go short in a future test
of the zone. The key to understanding the concept is to be clear that if this
bearish momentum was part of a single candlestick, the most traded level
within it would be that VPOC. We also see how this control is generated
by a minor redistribution scheme which causes the creation of the High
Volume Node.




       This is the best explanation to understand the fractality of the
market. As we can see, the behaviors are always the same regardless of
the time variable. Here lies one of the advantages of this methodology.
Once this is internalized, we can be in a position to cover with a greater
solidity the trade in different timeframes.
            PART 7. WYCKOFF 2.0




We come to the final part after having presented what from my point of
view are the most solid principles for discretionary and technical trading
in the financial markets. It is what I have called Wyckoff 2.0.

      It is about bringing together the main ideas of the Wyckoff
methodology; the principles of the auction theory and helping us with the
Volume Profile and Order Flow tools with the aim of proposing the most
robust scenarios possible.




1. WYCKOFF METHODOLOGY
      It is the cornerstone on which the trading approach is based mainly
because it is based on a real underlying logic, because it provides us with
a context with which to propose scenarios and because it offers us
different analytical tools with which to evaluate who may be in control of
the market.

       On the one hand, we talk about underlying logic because of the
theoretical framework behind it. There are many concepts that Richard
Wyckoff tried to disseminate, but without doubt the most relevant have
been the three fundamental laws and the processes of accumulation and
distribution.

      Among the three laws, if there is one that stands out as a standard
associated with the Wyckoff methodology, it is the Law of Supply and
Demand. It is the true engine of financial markets even though they have
evolved. Regardless of the type of participant, intent, valuation or
anything to do with the positioning of an order, in the end it is all about
executing a transaction, buying and selling; and this is universal.

       Furthermore, the processes of accumulation and distribution, going
hand in hand with the law of cause and effect, give us a very genuine
picture of how the market moves. There is no doubt that in order to
visualize an effect in the form of an uptrend it will first be necessary to
develop a cumulative cause; and that for a bearish effect to take place it
will first be necessary for a distributive process to take place. How such
processes will develop is quite another matter.

       On the other hand, we must emphasize the importance of having a
clear context to guide us. This is one of the most important sections of the
strategy since it allows us the possibility of considering certain
movements based on how the price is behaving up to the present moment.

      We understand that the interaction between supply, demand, buyers
and sellers creates structures that, although not in form but in substance,
are constantly repeated. The genuine identification of these structures
helps us to recognize the context in which we find ourselves in order to
favor the development towards one side or the other. At this point it is
important to emphasize what we understand by fractality and how minor
structures fit into other major ones.

       Finally, the Wyckoff methodology approach provides us with a
series of analytical tools with which to evaluate who is taking control of
the market during the development of the structures.

      Most market actions provide us with information about the
commitment of buyers and sellers to take control. The fact of developing
a move in a specific way or simply failing to develop a certain move
leaves us with very subtle clues with which to assess underlying strength
or weakness.

       Finally, the analyses under the Law of Effort and Result are very
useful in order to determine the harmony or divergence in the movements.
In the end, it is a matter of making the most objective analysis possible
and adding up the traces in favor of one side or the other to determine
who is more likely to be in control.




2. AUCTION THEORY
       Although Richard Wyckoff did not use these concepts in his
studies, the balance and imbalance are still the reasoning behind lateral
and trend movements.
       An accumulation and distribution range, terms that Wyckoff did
use, are exactly balancing zones where buyers and sellers exchange their
contracts as a sign of market efficiency, a term used by auction theory.
The same is true of upward and downward trending movements, which in
essence represent inefficiency and imbalance.

      Ultimately the underlying logic of the principles of the Wyckoff
methodology are based on exactly this, on auction theory, the acceptance
and rejection of certain areas; and this is what I am trying to convey to
anyone who alludes to this approach as an outdated and totally inoperative
method for today's markets.

       In addition, we incorporate the principle that the market, in order to
facilitate trading among its participants, will always seek to go to former
zones of high activity where both buyers and sellers exchanged a large
number of contracts. This principle is tremendously useful for more
accurate analysis and for locating logical zones for profit taking.




3. VOLUME PROFILE
     The Volume Profile is a tool that objectively identifies the most
important trading zones and volume-based trading levels.

       For Wyckoff traders the analysis of the profiles helps us to improve
the identification of structures mainly for those cases in which they
develop in a more erratic way where the events are not so easily
identifiable.

      Other interesting uses it offers us is the determination of market
bias through the analysis of trading zones and trading levels; in addition
to the analysis of trend health through the continuous evaluation of the
evolution of value areas.

       For those traders who do not take into account the Wyckoff
methodology approach, the Volume Profiles also provide a context for
setting scenarios based on the operating principles with the value areas.
While it is true that taking into account all the analytical tools offered by
the Wyckoff methodology can help us in favor of trading one way or the
other, these Volume Profile operating principles also serve as a roadmap
with which to expect specific price movements.

       Finally, it can also be tremendously useful to take it into account to
calibrate the position management; everything that has to do with the
entry of the trade, the location of the stop loss and the establishment of the
profit taking.




4. ORDER FLOW
       After studying in depth everything that has to do with the crossing
of orders and evidencing the problems of its analysis in isolation, we are
in a position to limit its use only on the key operating zones.

       Due to the discretion involved, using any type of Order Flow
analysis without taking anything else into account does not seem to be the
most solid way to approach it. If it is a subjective tool in itself, not having
a clear roadmap can turn the trade into a coin flip.

      This is where the importance of having a clear context and an
established directional bias comes in again. Only when we are in a
potential entry situation is it time to, if anything, look at how the crossing
of orders is occurring to validate our entry trigger.

       Taking imbalances as a fundamental basis, the proposed Footprint
analysis would mainly involve identifying the two key behaviors in
market turns: absorption and initiative, right at the moment of the
trigger search.

       Also, in the event that we have not been able to enter such a turn,
we still have the possibility of proposing an entry with a continuation
pattern through the identification of controls plus test.




OPERATING SCHEME
       Having as a fundamental basis the perception of value that we have
studied with the auction theory, the context and the analytical tools
offered by the Wyckoff methodology, as well as the analysis of levels and
trading zones that we identified by Volume Profile, we are going to
propose different trading strategies.

       In order to facilitate the understanding of this section, a summary
outline of the whole process is presented:




      1. Analysis of the context to bias directionality

                Range
                    In extremes

                    In the interior

            Trend

                    Interacting with the value zone

                    Away from the value zone

    2. Identification of zones and trading levels depending on the
type of strategy

            Trading zones of structures under Wyckoff methodology

            Trading zones: HVN and LVN

            Trading levels: VAH, VAL, VPOC and VWAP

   3. Scenario approach based on current price location

            Continuous validation protocol

            Alternative scenario

   4. Position management

            Input

            Stop Loss

            Take Profit
                7.1 CONTEXT ANALYSIS



The first thing to do when analyzing any chart is to determine the context
in which the price is: range or trend. Let's see a brief summary of the
trading possibilities depending on the context:




       In this chart we have an ideal accumulation scheme. We see how
the operating context offered by the Wyckoff methodology converges
with the operating principles by Volume Profile.

       Within the first three trading opportunities at extremes (1) of the
range context would fit with the principle of trading in range by Volume
Profile.

      After the Spring the price recovers the value area and we see again
the confluence of both principles: by Wyckoff methodology we would
look for a test to the top of the structure while by Volume Profile we
would activate the reversal trade where we would look for the visit to the
opposite end of the value area of the profile. This movement to the
opposite end we would be in a position to take advantage of it firstly on
the Spring and secondly if it leaves us a trading opportunity inside (2),
either on the potential test of the Spring or on a higher LPS.

     Profile we would activate the scenario of continuation trading in
which case we would do it on the end of the value area, in this bullish
example on the Value Area High.

       When the price is already in the middle of the trend movement we
would have to work with the context away from the value area (4) where
we would wait for some kind of pullback to look for the incorporation to
the current movement.




      7.1.1 TRADING RANGE CONTEXT

    This is the construction of the cause of the subsequent trend
movement which will be either upward or downward.

      This rotation phase can appear during the course of one or several
sessions (even weeks). If it contains several sessions it is best to pull a
volume profile together in order to identify the trading zones globally.

           1. At extremes of the range. If we observe the stop of the
         previous trend movement and some subsequent lateralization,
         we will determine that we are in a range context within an
         equilibrium zone and the trading here would be based on the
         search for reversals at the extremes of the structure; i.e., buy low
         and sell high.

            2. Inside the range. Inside the range. If we are in the
         interior of a large range and we have enough space we can also
         raise some trade looking for the extremes. This is especially
         advisable when we have seen a previous shock that provides us
         with a clearer directional context.




                 7.1.2 TREND CONTEXT

      When a trend is identified, the trader should only trade in favor of it
waiting for pullbacks to try to join the market.

            3. In trend interacting with the value zone if after being
         sideways there is an inefficiency that throws the price out of an
         equilibrium zone, we must evaluate the possibility that it is an
         effective break or a shock. If the previously analyzed footprints
         suggest that it could be an effective breakout, the operative here
         will be based on the search for the confirmation test on the
         broken structure or at some more immediate trading level.
            4. In trend away from the value zone. Once confirmed the
         effective rupture of the previous equilibrium zone, the price will
         now be in a trend context and the acceptance at these new levels
         where it is trading makes us base the trading in favor of this
         direction.



       The question we must constantly be asking ourselves is in what
context the market is currently in. Its answer will determine the type of
strategy to apply. As we already know, the only two conditions in which
the market can be in e balance or in imbalance. So basically we are going
to be working on range and trend trading.

      Next we are going to deepen in each of the operative contexts:




                7.1.3 TRADING RANGE

     We will mainly distinguish two scenarios within range trading
depending on the price in relation to the analyzed balancing zone:




IN EXTREMES
      That the price is trading within a value area suggests that the
balance is total between buyers and sellers. Neither of the two has control
and therefore the price is expected to continue to move in the same
dynamic.

      The trading context here would be to favor reversals at the
extremes:

      ❖ By Wyckoff methodology it would be to seek entry into the
       shakeout in Phase C. That is to say, if we are facing the upper
       part of the structure we will favor the Upthrust; while if we are in
       the lower part we will look for the Spring. Its genuine
       development will suggest the visit of the opposite end of the
       structure.

      ❖ By Volume Profile we would try to operate the reversal on the
       limits of the value area. We would therefore look for the bearish
       turn over the Value Area High and the bullish turn over the Value
       Area Low. A rejection over such areas would suggest the visit of
       the opposite end of the value area.




ON THE INSIDE
       On the other hand, if the range is wide enough some scenarios
could be posed inside it. By Wyckoff methodology, should we observe
that the price has possibly developed the test event in Phase C, it would be
the entry into the trending move inside the range in Phase D. The only
necessary filter would be that it had enough available trajectories to offer
a good risk/reward ratio.

       In that case, we would need to be positioned in favor of the more
trading levels the better. The fact that the price is able to reach one of
these levels and effectively break it will suggest that there is some control
by traders in that direction. If we are also in favor of a High Volume
Node, we would already have identified the bias of the market.

      Within a wide profile we will be able to identify different high and
low trading zones. We must remember that the last High Volume Node
generated will determine the directional bias at least in the short term. As
long as the price remains above it, we will only consider bullish scenarios
and vice versa if it is below it.

      ❖ A High Volume Node is a lateralization of the price. By pure
       logic, if we find ourselves above it, we can suggest that this HVN
       is an accumulation. Therefore, to buy we want to be protected
       with an accumulation below it.

      ❖ The reverse is true for distributions. If we are below a HVN it
       will be identified as a distribution, which makes us think that
       favoring shorts would be the most appropriate.

       This type of trading inside the range will be subject to necessarily
manage the position when reaching the extremes of the balancing zone,
since in principle we will have to continue favoring that none of the sides
has total control until the final imbalance is provoked.

       Supported by the trading principles of Volume Profile, in the event
that the price comes from making a shock we would be in a context of
trading in reversal applying the adapted rule of 80% where the
probability, after re-entering the value area is in the visit of the opposite
extreme.
               7.1.4 TRADING IN TREND

       After a movement of intentionality that breaks the balance and
where the analyzed traces suggest us that the imbalance is on one side or
the other, we will seek to trade in favor of that direction waiting for a test
at some relevant trading level.




INTERACTING WITH THE VALUE ZONE
       New information has entered the market causing the imbalance and
the first thing to evaluate is that it is not a failed breakout that generates a
shakeout with re-entry back into the value zone.

      If the traces suggest that it is an effective breakout, our bias now
should be to look for some trading idea in favor of that direction.

      ❖ Under Wyckoff methodology, if we see an impulsive move that
       intentionally breaks the structure we would look for entry on the
       Phase D breakout test.

      ❖ This type of trading is also useful for traders who do not trade
       structures. The logic is exactly the same. Based on pure Volume
       Profile analysis we could wait for the price to leave a certain
       value area and wait for the entry in the test of the same, this
       would be the continuation trade under the trading principles of
       Volume Profile.

      To try to determine if we are indeed in front of a potential genuine
breakout we will analyze different footprints. It is time to recall the
content seen in the section

      How to distinguish between accumulation and distribution?

       As main traces to try to clarify if the breakout will be genuine we
will take into account:

      1. The shakeout. Key action, search for liquidity. The deeper the
         shakeout, the stronger the scenario. Although local shakeouts
         sometimes occur (on some high or low within the range), let's
         wait initially for the total shakeout as it gives us greater
         confidence.

      2. Price action and volume after the shakeout and at the
         breakout. Candlesticks with good displacement and high
         volume denoting control by one side (buyers or sellers). At the
         time of the breakout, since we are facing a liquidity zone it is
         likely that relatively high volume will appear and even visually
         some wicking will be observed. This is normal and should not
         initially lead us to think that it could be a shakeout since
         takeover behavior has this characteristic: high volume and the
         possibility of wicking. The key is what happens next.

      3. The reaction after the breakout looking for the non-reentry
         to the range. After the breakout of a value zone we must wait
         for the price to gain acceptance at those new levels where it will
         be trading. This will initially be evidenced by a sideways
         movement in the market out of the range.

     A sign that would add further strength to the acceptance scenario
would be to observe the migration of the VPOC to that new area or the
creation of a new one (perhaps that of a later session). This initially
represents acceptance but we would still have to wait to confirm the
action, as we saw in the section on VPOC migration.

      And the final fingerprint is obtained by visualizing the non-reentry
back into the value area, into the range. At that point we will already have
a change in the perception of value: price + time + volume where the
probability would be in the continuation in favor of the breakout
movement.

      It should be noted that the time consumption after the breakout
should not be excessive. Enough to generate a new VPOC or its
migration, but at the moment this happens the price should start the trend
movement. The momentum behind the first imbalance should trigger
continuation with some alacrity.



       Once the price manages to position itself and stay out of the value
area we will determine that an imbalance has occurred, that such a move
has not been rejected and therefore we will be in a position to look for
entry in favor of that direction.

      ❖ If we are in a potential bullish breakout, all the volume seen
       below, as well as that previous balancing zone can now be
       identified as a potential accumulation. As we know, the effect of
       an accumulation will be a bullish movement and this is where we
       want to be positioned.

      ❖ Conversely, when we find ourselves in a situation of a possible
       bearish breakout, if the price is able to hold that zone and not re-
       enter the previous balancing area, we will be able to identify such
        process as distributive and it will be the moment to look for the
        trigger with which to enter into a sell position to take advantage
        of the subsequent bearish movement.




AWAY FROM THE VALUE ZONE
        We may begin to analyze a chart where the price is already out of a
certain value area and is moving in search of a new balancing zone. In this
context of trend movement, it is advisable to wait for the development of
a test on one of the trading levels that we identify.

      At this point it is convenient to remember Richard Wyckoff's
teachings on how markets move. It is well known that markets move in
the form of upward and downward waves: therefore, the scenario
proposed necessarily involves waiting for this wave, which will be
corrective in nature, before continuing in the direction of the trend
imbalance.

      The key now would be to identify possible zones over which to
wait for the price to develop this corrective movement. The Wyckoff
methodology would be to look for entry into the trend movement out of
the Phase E range. It is a confusing context since this trading according
to methodology goes through the search for new intentionality
candlesticks (SOS/SOWbar), minor structures and new shakeouts
(Ordinary Shakeout/Upthrust), but it does not suggest us the location over
which to expect the development of such behaviors.

       Here we see the importance of working with these volume-based
trading levels and zones. They help us determine clearer locations where
it is viable for price to go as well as offer us one more footprint to analyze
the health of the trend. The ideal scenario, for example, would be to wait
for the development of a minor structure above the zone where an trading
level such as the weekly VWAP or any other is located.

       A very interesting concept is that we will continue to trade in favor
of the last accumulation/distribution until the market develops a structure
in the opposite direction or until it loses the last identified value zone.

       In a trending context we will point to the last relevant high volume
zone that is supporting such a move. That is, if we are in an uptrend we
will have very present the last high trading node (HVN) below the current
price and if we are in a downtrend we will have identified the last HVN
just above the price. These nodes will ultimately determine the change in
market control. Therefore, we will only pose a counter-trend scenario
when this zone is breached. To go deeper into this concept, review again
the determination of the market bias through the analysis of the trading
zones seen in the section on Volume Profile uses.
7.2 IDENTIFICATION OF TRADING ZONES
             AND LEVELS



Once we already know the context and have determined what we want to
do (buy or sell), the second has to do with where. This involves
identifying the exact location where we expect the price to develop our
entry trigger.

       The trading logic is exactly the same for all contexts, profiles and
timeframes: identify the trading zones and levels and wait on them for our
trigger to confirm the imbalance and enter the market.

      Depending on the type of trading you do, you can adapt these same
concepts to your trading.

      ❖ If you are mainly an intraday trader, you may use the profile
       of the previous session as a basis for scenario building and the
       profile of the current session as a support.

      ❖ If you are a longer term trader you may find it more
       interesting to analyze the profile of the previous week as a basis
       to identify the trading zones; or a Composite profile to cover
       weeks or months and to be able to identify the high and low
       trading zones; as well as to take into account the VWAP of higher
        time frames such as weekly and monthly.

      ❖ If you trade structures, it may be best to pull fixed profiles
       anchored to the working structures and set up scenarios based on
       their trading zones.

      Or maybe what works best for you is to do a mix of all of the
above. In the end each trader will have to do individual work to determine
which way they feel most comfortable as there is no universal rule about
which profile to work with. The important thing is that the concepts are
exactly the same for different trading contexts.

       For this point it is useful to be clear that completed profiles have a
higher relevance than profiles in progress. By pure logic, a profile that is
still under development is susceptible to changes in its levels and
therefore the importance that we can give to these decreases. On the other
hand, completed profiles ultimately represent the final market consensus
and their levels become more important.

       As to how much time period Composite profiles should cover, there
is no general rule. You may want to consider the last week, the current
week, the last month, the current month or the current year. Here you
necessarily have to decide on a discretionary basis. There is no one profile
better than another and it is therefore the trader's job to determine which
one to work with. What is recommended is that these profiles cover
sufficient price action both above and below the current price in order to
be able to identify key trading areas, primarily high and low volume
nodes.

      The search for the trigger to enter will therefore be made
exclusively on the zones already indicated, distinguishing between:
      ❖ Trading zones of structures under Wyckoff methodology.

      ❖ Trading zones: HVN and LVN.

      ❖ Trading levels: VAH, VAL, VPOC and VWAP.



       Depending on the trading context, we will favor waiting on one or
the other levels:




AT EXTREMES OF THE RANGE
       This is the classic Wyckoff trade in the area of potential shakeout
of the highs/lows of the structure. Tradable the shakeout itself as a more
aggressive entry and the test of the shakeout as a more conservative entry.

      ❖ VAH/VAL. Taking into account the Volume Profile trading
       levels we will also be in a position to look for reversal over the
       extremes of the value area, which will sometimes coincide with
       the extremes of the structure. Range trading.




INSIDE THE RANGE
     Always taking into account that we should be in favor of a High
Volume Node and with enough distance we will wait for the price over:

         LVN. Low Volume Nodes by their very nature establish
         excellent areas over which to look for potential opportunities. In
        this context the ideal will be to identify such areas through a
        profile that covers the entire range.

        VWAP and VPOC. Either that of the current session for more
        intraday traders or that of a profile covering several of them for
        structure traders. These are the levels that determine the control
        of the market so we will wait for the price to produce the
        effective break above them and we will look for the first entry to
        test them.

       Sometimes the price after producing such a break will not leave any
test and the momentum will quickly move the price so that a more
aggressive entry would occur after producing the movement of
intentionality that breaks these levels.




IN TREND INTERACTING WITH THE VALUE ZONE
       After the beginning of the imbalance and having already evaluated
the possibility of continuity of the movement we will wait for a pullback
to assess the entry on:

      ❖ Level of the broken structure. For the structure trader this is
       another of Wyckoff's classic entries: Entry to the test after a
       breakout. Initially we will wait for the price in the area of the
       broken Creek/Ice, which by its very nature will be a Low Volume
       Node. Out of the corner of our eye we will also be watching the
       nearby trading levels so as not to rule out entry in case the price
       goes for any of these, mainly the extreme of the value area.
       ❖ Extremes of the value area. The intraday trader or one who
        simply does not operate taking into account structures could
        value the entry after leaving a certain value area (for example that
        of the current session) and wait for the price to test the extremes
        of its Value Area to enter. Continuation trading.

       ❖ VPOC of the range. It will be the last trading level above
        which to wait for the pullback after the breakout. If it is far away
        from the broken end, it is advisable to put the scenario in
        quarantine because at that point the price will have re-entered the
        value area and will already have some depth. In this case and
        under the trading principles of Volume Profile it would be
        necessary to activate the type of of failed reversal trading that
        manages to recover the end of the value area.




IN TREND AWAY FROM THE VALUE AREA
      Context of imbalance so we will already have in favor a HVN
(accumulation/distribution).

        We should expect some pullback at any trading level that the price
is at. If the first level is too close, it is likely that it will look for the next
one to develop a pullback with some proportionality in relation to the
previous momentum.

       ❖ Levels of the previous session profile. Generally, and due to
        the fact that we are in a trend context, the levels that the price will
        find before will correspond to those of the previous session
        (Value Area, VWAP and VPOC extremes). As the day unfolds,
        we may also raise some scenario on the levels of the current
        session.

      ❖ Weekly VWAP. We will always be very attentive to the
       location of the weekly VWAP as it is especially useful in these
       trend contexts to look for the end of the pullback and the
       beginning of a new impulsive movement.

      ❖ VPOC of the previous impulse. In addition, we can pull a
       fixed profile of the last impulse of the price and have located the
       location of its VPOC, as we already know that it is also a very
       interesting area on which to wait for the price.

      ❖ LVN. It is interesting to identify the low volume zones within
       the context we are trading. In this case we can use different
       profiles: composite to identify the general context; profile of the
       previous momentum and profile of previous sessions.



       For all contexts we will want to trade in favor of the more trading
levels the better. It is interesting to point out that the zones of confluence
of trading levels are highly recommended to look for entries above them,
highlighting the combination of VPOC and VWAP.
               7.3 SCENARIO PLANNING



Once we have the context clear, we know the type of strategy we are
going to try to execute and we have identified the location on which to
wait for the entry trigger, it is time to set the scenario.

     Normally the scenario to look for the entry trigger is going to be
composed of one or two moves:




ONE MOVE
       The price will already be positioned in favor of our idea and
therefore we should only wait for a simple action that will take the price
towards the trading area.

       If based on the context what we want is to buy, we will identify the
trading levels we have below where the price is likely to go.

      If, on the other hand, once the analysis of the context is done, we
determine that the best option is to trade short, we will identify the most
immediate trading levels above which to look for the short entry trigger.
       In this example we see that we are in a range context and in a
situation of potential Spring, so the scenario approach would be to wait
for a single movement to develop the test and look for the trigger of entry
in purchase.




TWO MOVES
      We may only want to buy or sell if certain price action occurs.

       If, based on the analysis of the context, we want to buy, but the
price is below the trading zone, we should wait for a first positioning
move above this zone and a second test move. Now we would be in a
position to look for the entry trigger.

       The same would happen if we want to sell but the price is above the
trading zone; in this case we should wait for a first movement of recovery
of the zone and a second test movement.
       In this other example the reading we make is that we are in a range
context in which the price comes from developing a potential Spring and
has serious possibilities that it is a cumulative range.




      At that precise moment and knowing the roadmap offered by the
methodology we would be ready to wait for the entry in purchase after
seeing the bullish breakout (1) plus the subsequent test (2). For context we
want to buy but the price is not in an operationally attractive area (as it is
going to face the key area) so it is appropriate to propose a two-move
scenario.

       As we know, the price could leave in 1 an Upthrust and re-enter the
price back to the balancing zone, but initially we should be directionally
biased to the upside after seeing that the downthrust and the breakout
bullish movement meet the characteristics.

       The market obviously will not always follow our approach. A large
number of occasions we will see how we are forced to change sentiment
based on what the price is doing. This is the key to continually analyzing
the reaction of participants as new information comes into the market.

      The best way to approach this scenario-building process is through
a continuous validation protocol. This is about actively reacting to what
the market does (If X, then maybe Y). This means "If the price does this,
then let's expect that". It is an optimal approach to know at all times what
to expect the price to do and be prepared to act with the alacrity required.

       “If price breaks Creek, then I'm going to wait for it to test to look
for buys. If on the other hand there is a failed breakout, then I'm going to
wait for a test in the opposite direction to enter short”

      The key here is to assess all the possible options that the market can
develop and, even if we are initially directionally biased to one side, we
should always also take into account an alternative scenario in the
opposite direction that allows us to make a quick change of bias if
necessary.




       An example is when the market faces the top of a structure. We are
in an trading zone, in a situation of potential bullish breakout or shakeout.
It may be that by context we are directionally biased to favor the bullish
breakout and that we are therefore looking for purchases to test the
breakout; but when the time comes what we observe is that the price re-
enters the range, strongly refusing to rise and leaves what looks like a
bullish jerk (Upthrust). At that point we should have enough capacity to
read this in real time and change the scenario approach to look for the
short.
             7.4 TRADING MANAGEMENT



While it is true that the most important element of this combination is
undoubtedly all that the Wyckoff methodology offers us, we have already
seen that the Volume Profile and Order Flow tools can certainly be useful
when it comes to improving our scenario and trading approaches.

       Thanks to the principles of the Wyckoff methodology, we will be in
a position to set up scenarios; thanks to the identification of the zones and
trading levels by Volume Profile we will be able to refine with greater
accuracy where the price is most likely to go; and thanks to the precision
of Order Flow it will allow us to further confirm and calibrate the entry
trigger.




                           7.4.1 ENTRY

       Regardless of the trading context, the market entry trigger will
always be an action that denotes intentionality on the part of the large
trader in favor of our direction.
       For pure price action analysis we will continue to work with the
significant candlesticks:

      ❖ Sign of Strength bar (SOSbar). Wide range bullish candlestick
       with close in the upper third and relatively high volume.

      ❖ Sign of Weakness bar (SOWbar). Wide range bearish
       candlestick with close in the lower third and relatively high
       volume.

     For those who want to observe the Order Flow I would only
recommend working with the concepts already explained:

      ❖ Turning pattern: absorptions and initiatives.

      ❖ Continuation pattern: controls and tests.

       In essence what we would look for in the turning pattern would be
to confirm that the SOS/SOWbar carries initiative; and in case of losing
the initial trigger we could look for a re-entry in the continuation pattern.
ENTRY ORDER
     As we saw in the section on order types, participants can enter the
market in different ways, basically with Market, Stop or Limit orders.

      In our case we are going to use Stop orders. Remember that these
are placed above the current price if we want to buy; and below the
current price if we want to sell.

       With the development of the significant candle we have an obvious
sign of interest, but it is interesting to use Stop orders as a definitive filter
that suggests some continuity in the movement initiated with the trigger
candle.

       Sometimes we will see the development of what initially looks like
a candle of intentionality and just after its closing the price reverses
sharply in the opposite direction. What has happened is that internally a
takeover process has taken place at all these price levels and traders with
greater capacity were positioning themselves on the opposite side. By
using this type of order, although it is true that we are not saved from this
potential situation, in many occasions where this is happening, it will
prevent us from entering the market.

      If we are really facing an imbalanced movement, this will have a
strong momentum where it will continue to push in favor of that direction.
With this type of limit order we will be entering in favor of the
momentum, of the imbalance.

       In any case this section should be evaluated more in depth by the
trader. It may be preferable to enter with a market order after the closing
of the trigger candle, after seeing an aggression in the track without
waiting for the closing of the candle or even use a limit order to enter on a
possible pullback. Either option could be valid.




WHY YOU SHOULD NOT ENTER WITH LIMIT ORDERS
       Simply because you would be betting that the move you expect is
going to happen, and if you remember, we are dealing in an environment
of total uncertainty so we don't know what is going to happen.




      For example, you might see a chart in a potential Spring situation.
If the analysis is correct, we know that the roadmap offered by the
methodology goes through the search for at least the top of the structure;
so maybe you think it is a good option to place a Buy Limit entry order
waiting for the Spring test to develop.

      But such a test may never take place and instead the price will
continue to fall, confirming that our analysis was not correct, which
would cause us to add a loss. The problem is not in taking that loss, since
it is part of the business, but rather that the basic approach was not the
most solid.




       At the point where you see the Spring potential and place the Buy
Limit, you are betting that the price will develop two movements: the
bearish movement to generate the test and the bullish one that will take
the price to the top of the range. And the key is that we can only propose
the development of one movement.

        In this case, we could initially propose the bearish movement as a
test since we are in a potential Spring position; and once the price reaches
the area where it "should" turn, we have to analyze again the price action
and the volume to see if the imbalance that generates the bullish turn
occurs and then we can propose the next bullish movement up to the
Creek.
       The underlying idea is that we must make a continuous analysis of
the interaction between buyers and sellers; and even if we are
directionally biased to one side based on the context, we must confirm
when the time comes that the approach is solid and that the market itself
confirms it.

       If in a potential Spring test position we see that aggressive buyers
appear and push the price up, this is the footprint we would need to see to
confirm that our analysis appears to be correct and in such a case would
offer us an trading opportunity. It should also be remembered that seeing
our entry trigger above the proposed zone has nothing to do with whether
that trade then turns out in profit or loss. As we have already seen, new
information is constantly entering the market and this could change
participants' perception of the security at any time.




                      7.4.2 STOP LOSS

       From a pure Wyckoff methodology point of view we will continue
to recommend placing the stop loss on the other side of the significant
candlesticks (SOS/SOW bar) and structures. The logic is that if large
traders have actively entered these developments they will defend their
position in case the price goes against them.

       Additionally, we will always want to place the stop loss on the
other side of the more levels and trading zones the better.

     The first zone we will be looking for will be a low volume node
(LVN). As we have already mentioned, by its very nature this low trading
zone is likely to act as a rejection and that is exactly what we are looking
for: that in case the price reaches this zone it will cause a V-turn and that
this rejection will protect our position.

       It must be taken into account that the other way of representing the
rejection is that the price quickly crosses those price levels. If so, it would
surely reach and execute our protective stop. As we do not know what
may happen, we must necessarily use this type of zone with the initial
premise that the type of rejection it represents in a possible future visit is
that of the V-turn.

       The logic of using the rest of the operating levels protecting the
position basically lies in the fact that a high amount of volume will be
traded on them and could also act as levers that cause a turn in the price.
Some might think that if these levels act as magnets due to the liquidity
that is located on them, why use them to protect the position? If we are
bought and we have them below, based on the principle that they act as
magnets, wouldn't it be logical to think that the price will go looking for
them? The logic here is that at the moment of entry we are working in
favor of a price imbalance looking for its continuity. And therefore it is
the moment when the price will move away from such levels that
generally represent equilibrium and acceptance by all. If at the moment of
truth the imbalance is not such, we still have the possibility of saving the
position if at these levels participants that turn the market re-enter.
       If we are in a potential Spring situation and we see the appearance
of a SOSbar, we would be in a position to enter the market with a Buy
Stop order at the breakout above the candle leaving the Stop Loss location
either below the trigger candle itself (#1) or below the entire structure
(#2).

      At either of these two points the Stop Loss would be protected first
by the imbalances generated in the trigger candle; by any VWAP that has
been generated, and by the Value Area Low of the structure's profile
which in essence is the Low Volume Node.




       In this bearish example, if the SOWbar appears offering us the
short entry trigger, we would place the Sell Stop order below its low and
we would also have several locations for the Stop Loss: just above its high
(#1), at the highest high generated in the turn (#2) and on the other side of
the VPOC of the profile (#3).
        We would be protected by the candle itself, by some VWAP and by
the Value Area Low of the profile that besides being a Low Volume Node
in this case coincides as the ICE (support) of the structure.

       It would be necessary to make a point with respect to the VPOC of
the profile. In this example we have it a little further away but it is still a
relevant level to take into account. The trader should analyze if placing
the stop at that level would still have an acceptable Risk:Reward ratio.

       This is one of the peculiarities of discretionary approaches and that
is that we must adapt to market behavior. Sometimes all the levels will
converge in a very narrow range giving us greater confidence; while other
times they will certainly be separated and we must evaluate which
location is more optimal and if the risk is worth it.




                     7.4.3 TAKE PROFIT

        In my first book "The Wyckoff Methodology in Depth" I already
listed the possible actions we could use to make profits. We mainly talked
about:

      1. Climatic bar evidence. Especially useful when we do not have
         any reference to the left of the chart.

      2. After the development of the Phase A stop of the previous trend
         movement.

      3. In liquidity zones generated by relevant price turns (previous
         highs and lows).
       Thanks to the addition of the Volume Profile we can add a new
objective way even more useful when we have price trading in the
direction where we want to take profits:




IN AREAS OF HIGH PREVIOUS TRADING
       It is about using the High Volume Nodes that we have in the
direction of the trade. We already know the magnetic nature of such areas
and it is therefore that they provide us with some confidence to use them
as targets.

       Supported by the auction theory, after an imbalance the market will
look to find traders with the opposite bias who are willing to trade again.
This is why the price will move to those areas where there was previously
high trading as the same thing is expected to happen again.

       Very important to remember again the short term mentality of the
market where the last trading areas will have a higher relevance in terms
of price attraction than the older areas.

       The concept of High Volume Node when setting the target could be
somewhat ambiguous. The HVN is an area, and the order to take profit is
a specific price level, Where exactly to place it? For this purpose it is very
interesting to take into account the VPOC of that particular value zone.
The HVN serves us to identify the probable price visit zone and its VPOC
for the exact location of the target.

       For a more intraday trading it can be extremely useful to have
identified the Developing Volume Point of Control (DVPOC). These are
price levels that were at one point in time the VPOC for a session,
whether or not they were the final VPOC for that session. As we know,
the VPOC of the session is changing based on the negotiations that take
place, and this level represents that footprint of change. In short, what we
are dealing with is a level of high trading and therefore most likely to
have some magnetic behavior.




      In this example we see how the price distributes in this profile in
the form of P and the bearish development is going to look for an old
DVPOC below (1) to turn back from there in the form of V to go to test
again another DVPOC of the current session above (2).

       It should be noted that we only take into account those DVPOCs
that have not been tested. In this example we see other DVPOCs that have
already been tested and therefore would not be valid for target setting, as
would be case 3.

       The same would be true for naked VPOCs. We have not discussed
this level before because its usefulness is focused almost exclusively as a
possible target level. Naked VPOCs are VPOCs from previous sessions
that have not been tested. Unlike DVPOCs, naked VPOCs were the final
VPOC of the session. There are statistics that claim that VPOCs from
previous sessions are tested in the following days with a high probability.
That is why they are very interesting to take into account.

       In the following example we see the magnetism exerted by these
levels attracting the price and even generating a subsequent turn.

       In both charts different configurations have been used to visualize
specifically one or the other level (DVPOC and nakedVPOC). It is
recommended to use both since by their very nature they both represent
previous high trading zones.




   7.4.4 WHAT TO DO WHEN THE PRICE
           GOES WITHOUT US?
      Sometimes we will have to see how even having made a good
scenario approach the price initiates the movement we were looking for
without us, having had the possibility of entering the market.

      If there is something that is not recommended is to enter by
momentum guided by some kind of negative sentiment to have lost the
movement. Entering in desperation is generally not a good strategy in the
long run. If the price goes without us absolutely nothing happens, it is part
of the game just like stop loss jumps. If the underlying idea has not
changed, we can continue to look for entry in new trading zones.

      It is much more interesting to make another type of constructive
reading in this situation, such as that you have made a good analysis.

       While it is true that we approach the market with the ultimate goal
of obtaining profitability from its movements, the fact of being right in the
analysis should already be a reason to be certainly satisfied.

       The reading is that your analysis of who was in control of the
market and what was the most likely move was good and this is
tremendously important as an example that ultimately the knowledge is
internalized and that by following that line it is a matter of time before the
results appear.

       The only thing that has failed is either the exact visit to the area
where you expected the price to be; or that the price has not left a genuine
trigger to generate the sending of the orders. In any case, it is necessary to
remember that we have absolutely no control over the market and that our
task is to set up scenarios with the highest possible probability.

       Also, we must also keep in mind that, having as one of the main
rules the conservation of capital, you may not have taken advantage of the
movement you expected but at least you were not positioned on the wrong
side of the market and therefore you do not add any losses.
           PART 8. CASE STUDIES




In this last part we are going to see in detail some real examples where the
theoretical concepts previously presented are put into practice.

       As I always comment, the really interesting thing about this type of
examples is to observe how the market tends to present the same schemes
but in different ways depending on the moment. This is what we are
referring to when we state that the market must be given "flexibility" in
the development of structures.

       This is something that, by now, you should have internalized. The
Wyckoff methodology is not about labeling almost robotically every
move. It doesn't make any sense and we have already explained why. It is
about analyzing as objectively as possible the actions of the market (both
what it does and what it fails to do) in order to give more control to buyers
or sellers.
      Also, this section will be useful to see how the Volume Profile and
Order Flow readings are incorporated into the trading plan.
      8.1 EURO/DOLLAR ($6E)CURRENCY
                  CROSS



Chart on July 2, 3 and 6, 2020. Range context, extreme trading; plus trend
context, trading away from the value zone.




        This example is very representative of almost everything studied as
it is full of interesting details.

       First we see the stop of the bearish movement (SC, AR, ST)
starting from there a new lateralization or equilibrium context. The UA
already suggests to us in Phase B buying intentionality by testing the
highs of the structure. Maximums of the structure whose nature is a LVN
(Low Volume Node) as reflected in the profile of the first day. LVN that
repeatedly acts as a rejection zone causing the price to turn until it finally
crosses it with speed. The Spring plus its test initiates the bullish
imbalance moving the market higher with relative ease.




       Looking deeply at this potential Spring action on the footprint
chart, we see how the pattern of a turn in favor of the buyers is
represented by the rotation on the Delta (-240 to +183). In this first action
it should be noted that the bearish candle does not show a clear process of
potential takeover, as we suggest looking for; but this is the reality of the
market. We will not always see theoretical patterns represented in the
same way and the case is perfect to exemplify the need to give flexibility
to the market and be prepared for anything.

       Beyond not having seen this potential takeover process, the
objective is that after a wide range bearish candle and high volume the
price does not have continuity and turns with the same aggressiveness to
the upside (divergence effort/result).

       Very clear the following action presented as a continuation pattern
with the creation of the control plus the test. The control would be
reflected by the maximum trading zone within the bullish candlestick. We
see how the price is going to develop the test right at that zone to continue
the imbalance upwards from there.
       In addition to the price dynamics discussed within the range, we
can also observe other signals in the volume such as the decrease
throughout its development, the appearance of a greater presence of
buying Weis; as well as the reading of a finished auction that we can
make of the profile of day 3. That the volume represents a potential
finished auction in confluence with a potential Spring is a very interesting
signal to assume as a lack of interest to continue falling.

       Another very striking point of interest are the continuations that
occur once the price is away from the value zone and in an uptrend
context. Here the concept of VPOC migration appears to support possible
entries. We see how after the migrations the price continues its bullish
development (C1 and C2) almost immediately. This is a very useful input
for this type of context. In the third continuation (C3) the market is going
to visit one of the most important trading levels, the weekly VWAP, to
develop a new upward momentum from there.

      Regarding the targets, the first one (tp1) to take into account would
be that former high trading zone (High Volume Node) which also left a
DevelopingVPOC. And without further volume references to the left,
subsequent targets would be to identify liquidity zones as relevant
previous highs (tp2).
    8.2 POUND/DOLLAR ($6B) CURRENCY
                 CROSS



Trading profile chart week on June 29 to July 3, 2020. Range context,
trading inside; plus trend context, trading interacting with the value zone.




       In this case, the operating profile has been used as the one set by
the volume traded during the previous week. As already mentioned, there
is no one profile better than another and it is therefore up to the trader to
choose the trading style he/she wants to develop. The important thing is
that the profile you decide to work with is completed to avoid confusion
when the current levels are modified.
      In the first red box we would be in a trading position waiting for
our entry trigger. We are inside the value area but interacting just above
the VPOC of the profile, so our bias at that point, being above that VPOC,
should be to favor bullish continuation.

       The price develops a lower structure and in Spring potential
position coincides with a test at the operating level. From there it
generates a first upward imbalance that causes the break of the profile by
its upper part. Very visual how the bullish Weis stands out signaling that
high participation in the breakout movement; and how the following
action denotes lack of interest in the movement.

       Just at that precise moment, at the end of the breakout movement,
the trader handling the tools proposed in this methodology should
necessarily be favoring bullish continuation. Basically because we come
from observing a minor accumulation structure that has managed to break
to the upside suggesting us therefore that the control is apparently on the
side of the buyers.

       As suggested in the trading checklist, we already have the first
point resolved which is: what we want to do, whether to buy or sell. In
this case and as we have just argued, we want to favor buying. Now we
would need to answer point number two of the checklist, which is: where
we are going to want to buy. is: where are we going to want to buy. We
need to identify the level where we are going to be waiting for the price.
In this example we have a very important confluence zone: the Value
Area High of the broken weekly profile, the weekly VWAP (green line)
and the upper end of the previous accumulation structure (Creek).

     The identification of the second point of the checklist leads us
immediately to the third, which is the scenario approach. In this case, as
we are already in favor of the trading level, we would be waiting for a
single move for the price to position itself in our trading zone.




       Once the price has arrived there, we would finally have to wait for
the development of our entry trigger, which is part of step four of the
checklist. In this example we have used the Footprint to visualize the
order flow and it has allowed us to see the entry of aggressive buyers
represented on these two candlesticks with positive delta of 685 and 793
that have also left imbalances in the ASK column. We would already have
our checklist completed and therefore ready to send the orders to enter the
market.

       The recommended position management would be to place a buy
stop order at the breakout of the bullish candle, with the stop loss at the
low of the bearish candle. Returning to the previous chart, we would need
to identify an interesting trading level on which to take profits or, failing
that, a previous high that establishes a clear liquidity zone. In this case,
further to the left we would have identified an old VPOC not yet tested
(nakedVPOC).
                  8.3 S&P500 ($ES) INDEX



Chart on July 17, 2020. Range context, trading inside. Beginning of
bullish reversal.




      In this first 15 minutes timeframe chart we have the exit of the price
below the value area of the previous day to begin to develop in that area a
new range.

      Initially and favoring the trading principle of bearish continuity,
unless a longer term context would have biased us differently we should
have been willing to favor short entry in a potential test to the Value Area
Low of the previous session's profile.
       Instead, what we see is that the price manages to re-enter the Value
Area Low and does so preceded by a jolt to the lows that triggers the
bullish movement. Here we can see the importance of handling different
scenarios depending on how the price behaves and of making a
continuous evaluation of the movements.

       If we look closely at the chart, after re-entering the Value Area the
price pulls back to test the area where the VWAPs converge. Maybe that
test, because it was slightly below the VAL would not have given us all
the confidence to trade it as a buy; but the opportunity appears next when
the price recovers the VA and now it does leave a test inside.

       In the following chart of shorter time frame (5 minutes) we see in
more detail this action. Here the structure under Wyckoff methodology is
more recognizable. Although the stop of the bearish movement is not very
genuine, we see some lateralization and the Spring plus test that originate
the bullish breakout. Once again, the visualization of the Weis wave
indicator is very useful, suggesting the institutional support of the
movement. After the breakout, we do not re-enter the range accepting
these levels.

       At the moment when we are in a situation of potential BUEC to
provoke the bullish imbalance, we are already waiting for the appearance
of our entry trigger that allows us to launch orders to buy.
       It is therefore time to, if anything, begin to visualize the Footprint
chart in search of that turning pattern that alerts us of the imbalance in
favor of speculators who are opening positions to buy.




       This is exactly what we see represented in the box shown. Beyond
the fact that the potential takeover is visual, the imbalance that is reflected
in this bullish candle, with a relatively higher volume than average and
with a very positive delta comparatively speaking, has a greater relevance.
After seeing this, it would undoubtedly be time to send the buy order.

       As a target we would first have the opposite end of the value area,
in this case the Value Area High, a level that also converges as seen in the
second chart with a former VPOC area.
      8.4 AMERICAN DOLLAR/CANADIAN
       DOLLAR CURRENCY CROSS ($6C)



Chart of July 22, 2020. Range context, trading at extremes.




      The price starts the session the next day within the previous day's
value area, where it begins to sideways suggesting to us a total balance
between buyers and sellers. The valuations of the agents that are operating
at that moment are very similar, which causes a continuous rotation
around the central zone.

      With this basic context; and under the hypothesis that the market
continues in this state of equilibrium, that no new information arrives that
causes the participants to change their valuations, the operative principle
to work on is to look for the reversion at the extremes; that is to say, to
look for purchases when the price interacts with the low part of the value
(Value Area Low) and sales on the high part (Value Area High).

      We are therefore ready to set up the scenarios. We know what we
want to do (buy or sell) and we know the exact location where we will
wait for the price to look for the entry trigger. This means having a plan
and not following the price reactively and by momentum.

      As you can see on the chart, the price is finally going to visit the
bottom of the value zone. It performs a very precise test and from there it
launches towards the opposite extreme. This movement could be labeled
within the Wyckoff methodology events as a potential Spring since it
would be found shaking the lows of that small structure that has been
generated during the two days.

       At that precise moment it may be useful to visualize the order flow
chart to confirm or not our buy entry trigger. We are in the right location
and; as we know that the price could extend a little longer before turning,
or even continue the bearish development, we need to see the aggressive
buy entry above that area to determine the possible start of the imbalance
to the upside




      And right at the location of the potential Spring we see the
appearance of that imbalance on the ASK column, which could suggest
speculative buying entry. This would be the signal we are looking for
before proceeding to send orders.

       As we can see, the price then launches towards the opposite
extreme, crossing the entire value area. This is an example of trading
under the 80% Market Profile principle. Principle that suggests that; in
case the price tries to break a value area and fails, re-entering again, the
price has an 80% chance of reaching the opposite end of the value area.
Although this strategy was originated for Market Profile, the same
principle can be used working with Volume Profile due to the similarities
of their theories.

       The profit taking in this case would therefore be very clear: by
testing the Value Area High of the trading profile. If the price reaches this
point, the situation would be very interesting because we would be
coming from a potential Spring; which, as we all know, is the event that
unbalances the control of the upward structure. Therefore, if we are right
in the analysis, it would still have to develop at least one more upward
movement.

        That would be the roadmap we would be driving, but certainly that
test to the VAH is our first management zone. Here you could decide to
close the entire position or leave some contract, but what we should do at
least is to protect the position; that is, move the stop loss to the entry level
(known as Breakeven)
    8.5 POUND/DOLLAR ($6B) CURRENCY
                 CROSS



 August 03, 2020. Trend context, trading interacting with the value zone.




       Example of intraday trading favoring the shorter term context, in
this case, using as trading profile the one of the previous session.

      The fact that we use profiles of previous sessions as a framework
on which to base our trading does not mean that the principles of the
Wyckoff methodology are left aside. As we can see, it is essentially the
same; the only difference is in the time frame used.

      Any Wyckoff trader with some experience could identify a
structure and label all the events that the methodology teaches us within
that profile. Moreover, by the time it is pointed out as the zone where to
look for the entry trigger, the most astute analysts will have already been
able to identify a new structure. This is what is important, the context,
what you are going to favor (buy or sell) based on what the price does.

       In this example, having seen that we are coming from a
distributional structure, we will initially be favoring shorting. The next
step would be to identify at what point we are going to wait for the price
to proceed in search of the trigger. Here, the first interesting zone is the
Value Area Low of the profile.

       During the current day the market begins to lateralize creating new
value in this area. This is a signal of acceptance of the previous
distribution, so we can add one more input in favor of our bearish
scenario.

      Once the price is in the proposed trading zone, we have an
important confluence of events since on the one hand we would be
developing a test to the old broken value zone; and also this movement
could be part of a shakeout of this new structure that would be forming

      It would be the ideal time to go and analyze the Order Flow chart
and see what is happening inside the candlesticks and if in the shorter
term our entry trigger is confirmed.
       And right in that location what we see is this, a bearish turn with a
lot of selling aggressiveness. Already in the last bullish candle we can
suggest some takeover of purchases evidenced by the high volume, the
large number of executions taking place in the ASK column and the no
bullish continuation reflected in the upper wick.

       Following this, a large sell participation evidenced mainly by the
large negative delta suggests a sell initiative and the possible beginning of
the bearish imbalance. The next bearish candlestick would serve as a
definitive confirmation of seller control: wide range candlestick, with
good volume and closing at lows, what we know by Wyckoff
methodology as SOWbar (Sign of Weakness Bar).

        These examples are very instructive to see the infinite ways in
which the same action, as in this case is the bearish turn, can appear on
the chart. Sometimes it will be very clear both the takeover and the
initiative process; and other times it will not be so. Given that we are in a
particular trading area and that we have the support of the context, it
would be more interesting to prioritize the appearance of the initiative in
favor of the direction we expect the market to move over visualizing the
previous takeover process, since as we see it does not always appear in the
most genuine way.
       Unlike the takeover process, the initiative would be an
indispensable action (for traders who decide to analyze the order flow),
since ultimately we are waiting for those speculators to appear to
definitely unbalance the control.

       Finally, in this trading possible Take Profit would be located at that
old level that was VPOC and that by its very nature represents a high
trading area even in the short term.
    8.6 EURO/DOLLAR CURRENCY CROSS
                  ($6E)



Day August 31, 2020. Range context, trading inside. Principle of failed
reversal.




      This type of trading usually presents major confidence issues
because we initially come from prioritizing the reversal scenario and then
change bias.

       Also using the previous day's profile as a trading basis, we see that
on the last day the price tries to leave this value zone through its upper
part causing a rejection and re-entering the range. At that point we begin
to look for the short entry favoring the reversal principle.
      The failed reversal is a perfect example of why trading levels
should be used to manage the position as the price interacts with them.
They are decisive zones and we do not know what will happen, therefore
the only thing under our control is to minimize the risk of our trading.

       If just above the identified trading zone we see a reversal like the
one seen in the footprint chart, at least two decisions could be made in
time. First, if we are positioned short, we may want to close the position
and avoid touching the Stop Loss even if it is already in a Breakeven
position. This type of active management, at times like this, is very
important as it will allow us to further reduce the risk by being able to
take a few more points off the market. On the other hand, if the longer-
term context accompanies, you may want to enter into a purchase favoring
this principle of failed reversal.

       In case of considering a purchase, there is an interesting detail to
take into account. As the entry trigger is below the weekly VWAP, it
could be a good option to make such a trade with a lower leverage, for
example, in a CFD market. This is a perfect example to evaluate the
possibility of trading the same asset in different markets depending on the
confidence we have in the trade in question. If we find ourselves in a
situation like this in which we observe such elements against the proposed
scenario, the most advisable thing to do would be advisable not to trade in
a leveraged market such as the futures market; and on the contrary, to go
to a market that offers a less leveraged type of trading such as CFDs.
       Going further into this concept of working with different brokers
and markets, it is important to remember that you do not necessarily have
to pigeonhole yourself into any particular type of trading. You may want
to carry out shorter-term speculative trading of the asset in question on the
futures market; and this is not incompatible with proposing scenarios that
cover a longer time horizon and carry out such medium-term trades using
the CFDs already mentioned; and also to be able to carry out longer-term
trading with spot shares or exchange-traded funds (ETFs), for example.

       This is one of the benefits of the methodology, its universality. Its
reading, being based on the true engine of the market, the continuous
interaction between buyers and sellers, is equally valid regardless of the
asset and seasonality; with the only basic requirement being that the
particular asset has sufficient liquidity.
                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


      Aldridge, I. (2010). High-Frequency Trading: A Practical Guide to
Algorithmic Strategies and Trading Systems. John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

     Alexander Trading, LLC. (2008). Practical Trading Applications of
Market Profile.

      Brooks, A. (2012). Trading Price Action Trends. Wiley Trading.

       Daniels Trading. (2018). Types of Futures Trades: Basis, Spread,
Hedging.                          Obtained                         from
https://www.danielstrading.com/2018/02/06/types-futures-trades-basis-
spread- hedgingç

       Delgado-Bonal, A. (2019). Quantifying the randomness of the stock
markets.          Obtained       from          Scientific       Reports:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-49320-9

      Diaman Partners Ltd. (2017). Are financial markets Random or
Deterministic? Obtained from http://blog.diamanpartners.com/are-
financial-markets-random-or-deterministic

       Edwin Oswaldo Gil Mateus, H. D. (2016). Mercados financieros,
eficiencia y adaptación.

      Obtained from http://dx.doi.org/10.19052/ed.3735

     Hawkins, P. S. (2003). Steidlmayer on Markets: Trading with
Market Profile. John Wiley & Sons.
      Healthy Markets Association. (2015). The dark side of the pools:
What investors should learn from regulators´actions.

      James F. Dalton, E. T. (1993). Mind over markets.

      Jones, D. L. (1993). Value-Based Power Trading – Using the
overlay demand curve to pintpoint trends & predict market turns. Probus
Publishing Company.

      Jones, D. L. (2002). Auction Market Theory. Cisco Futures.

     Keppler, J. (2011). Profit With the Market Profile: Identifying
Market Value in Real Time.

      Marketplace Books Inc.

      Koy, P. S. (1986). Market & Markets Logics. The Porcupine Press.
Lewis, M. (2018). Flash Boys. Norton & Company.

      Lloret, V. M. (2016). La guía the Tradingway.

      Lo, A. W. (2017). Adaptive Markets: Financial Evolution at the
Speed of Thought. Princeton University Press.

      Nasdaq. (2019). Total markets. A blueprint for a better tomorrow.

      Patterson, S. (2013). DARK POOLS: The Rise of the Machine
Traders and the Rigging of the U.S. Stock Market. Random House LCC
US.

      Peter Gomber, B. A. (2011). High-Frequency Trading.

       Piras, A. F. (2018). Non-random behavior in financial markets.
Obtained                                                        from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322820666_Non_Random_Patterns_in_Fin
      SEC. (2011). Pub. No. 141 (3/11) Trading Basics. understanding
the Different Ways to Buy and sell stock.

     SIFMA Insights. (2019). Electronic Trading Market Structure
Primer.

      Tapiero, P. d. (2014). Is there light in dark trading? A GARCH
analysis of transactions in dark pools.

       Valtos, M. (2015). Trading Order Flow - Understanding &
Profiting From Market Generated Information As It Occurs.

       Verniman.     (2020).   Futures     Trading.     Obtenido     de
https://verniman.blogspot.com/

       Warner, J. (2019). High-frequency trading explained: why has it
decreased?       Obtained     from     https://www.ig.com/en-ch/trading-
strategies/high-frequency-trading-explained--why-has-it-decreased-
-181010

      Wedow, M. P. (2017). Dark pools in European equity.

       Wikipedia. (2021). Algorithmic trading.         Obtained    from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithmic_trading
         ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS



I sincerely hope that studying this book has brought you value and will
enable you to reach higher levels in your performance as a trader or
investor.

      The content is dense and full of nuances. It is very complicated to
acquire all the knowledge with a simple reading, so I recommend that you
return to make a new study as well as personal notes for a better
understanding.

       I would love to know your opinion about the book so I invite you to
leave a rating.

      As you know, I am continually doing research and sharing more
information, so I invite you to write me at info@tradingwyckoff.com so I
can include you in a new list and receive future content updates for free.

      See you on the social media!

      Twitter

      Youtube

      Instagram

      Web
             ABOUT THE AUTHOR




Ruben Villahermosa Chaves has been an independent analyst and trader
in the financial markets since 2016.

      He has extensive knowledge of technical analysis as well as
development of trading strategies based on quantitative analysis.

       His passion for the world of investment has led him to devour a
large amount of training on this subject which he tries to disseminate from
principles of honesty, transparency and responsibility.
        BOOKS BY THIS AUTHOR


                   The Wyckoff Methodology in Depth




The Wyckoff methodology is a technical analysis approach to trading the
financial markets based on the study of the relationship between the
forces of supply and demand.

      The approach is simple: When large traders want to buy or sell,
they carry out processes that leave their traces and that can be observed on
the charts through price and volume.

       The Wyckoff methodology is based on identifying this intervention
of the professional to try to elucidate who has control of the market with
the aim of trading with them.
      What will you learn?

     ▶ How markets move. The market is formed by movements in
waves that develop trends and cycles.

      ▶ The 3 fundamental laws. The only discretionary method that has
an underlying logic behind it

           1.   The law of Supply and Demand.

           2. The law of Cause and Effect.

           3. The law of Effort and Result.

       ▶ The processes of accumulation and distribution. Development
of structures that identify the action of great professionals

     ▶ The events and phases of the Wyckoff Methodology. The key
market actions that will allow us to perform judicious analysis

       ▶ Trading. We combine context, structures and trading zones to
position ourselves on the side of the great traders.
